

 
Moore's almanac; * FUTURE SHOCK RESHAPE I.T.
Sydney Morning Herald (Australia)
July 8, 1997 Tuesday
Late Edition
Copyright 1997 John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd All Rights Reserved
Section: COMPUTERS; Information Technology; Pg. 6
Length: 979 words
Byline: PETER LEYDEN
Body
Doubling, superchips, quantum leaps; PETER LEYDEN talks to Gordon Moore, Intel's board chair emeritus.
FOR more than 30 years, Moore's Law has governed Silicon Valley like an immutable force of nature. The idea that 
processing  power  will  double  every  18  months  has  been  treated  as  an  axiom  -  rather  than  the  rule  of  thumb  it 
actually is.
No-one  knows  this  better  than  Gordon  Moore  (pictured  right).  In  an  obscure  1965  magazine  article,  Moore,  then 
R&D  director  at  Fairchild  Semiconductor,  reluctantly  predicted  the  expected  increase  in  the  power  of  integrated 
circuits over 10 years.
By  the  1970s,  Moore  was  a  co-founder  of  Intel,  and  his  tenuous  "law"  was  well  on  its  way  to  becoming  a  self-
fulfilling prophecy among researchers, manufacturers, and vendors.
Now, at 68, Moore will serve as Intel's board chair emeritus. Moore is asked to look towards the next 30 years and, 
again, make some predictions about the future of computing power.
LEYDEN: How long will Moore's Law hold?
MOORE: It'll go for at least a few more generations of technology.
Then,  in  about  a  decade,  we're  going  to  see  a  distinct  slowing  in  the  rate  at  which  the  doubling  occurs.  I  haven't 
tried to estimate what the rate will be, but it might be half as fast - three years instead of 18 months.
What will cause the slowdown?
We're running into a barrier that we've run up against several times before: the limits of optical lithography.
We  use  light  to  print  the  patterns  of  circuits,  and  we're  reaching  a  point  where  the  wavelengths  are  getting  into  a 
range where you can't build lenses anymore. You have to switch to something like X-rays.
Would X-rays open a whole new round of doubling?
Theoretically, they keep us on this curve for a longer time. Practically, they have a lot of problems. If we get away 
from optical lithography, somehow we have to get the subsequent technique up to the same level of sophistication 
to keep making progress rapidly.
X-rays represent a sufficiently dramatic change that it will be difficult to build on what we've done in the past. We'll 
have to start over, and it's going to take a long time to get traction.

Page 2 of 3
Moore's almanac; * FUTURE SHOCK RESHAPE I.T.
 
Obviously, the industry is worried about this. We're looking at a $US200 billion industry that typically invests 10 per 
cent of its revenues into research and development.
A significant fraction of that will be aimed at solving this problem. Maybe something will come out that will make this 
transition a lot less onerous than I believe.
Are the costs getting prohibitive?
Recently somebody gave me Moore's Second Law: The cost of manufacturing facilities doubles every generation.
In  the  late  1980s,  billiondollar  plants  seemed  like  something  a  long  way  in  the  future.  They  seemed  almost 
inconceivable.
But now, Intel has two plants that will cost more than $2.5 billion apiece.
And the cost of each generation after that will double?
That's where you get into numbers that sound impossible again.
If we double it for a couple of generations, we're looking at $10 billion plants. I don't think there's any industry in the 
world that builds $10 billion plants, although oil refineries probably come close.
Obviously,  our  first  reaction  is  to  see  what  we  can  do  to  keep  the  technology  moving  but  the  costs  down.  For 
example, we used to build a completely new set of equipment each generation. Now our development people try to 
reutilise as much of the previous generation's equipment as possible. And they've been pretty successful.
We may bring a $10 billion plant down to the $5 billion range. But these are still huge numbers.
What will we be able to do with these superchips?
Even with the level of technology that we can extrapolate fairly easily - a few more generations - we can imagine 
putting a billion transistors on a chip.
A  billion  transistors  is  mind-boggling.  Exploiting  that  level  of  technology,  even  if  we  get  hung  up  at  a  mere  billion 
transistors, could keep us busy for a century.
How much more powerful than today's chips are billiontransistor chips?
Our  most  advanced  chips  in  design  today  will  have  less  than  10  million  transistors.  So,  we're  talking  about  a 
hundred times the complexity of today's chips.
We wouldn't have the foggiest idea what to do with a billion transistors right now, except to put more memory in a 
chip and speed it up. But as far as adding functionality, we don't know what can be done.
Do you think DNA computing, or organic semiconductors, could supersede microprocessors?
I'm sceptical about that stuff. You stir up a bunch of goo, and it's going to do something? I'm a chemist, so I can say 
this. The things we build don't happen that way. We're more deliberate in the way we do things.
I  believe  that  the  technology  our  industry  has  developed  -  this  idea  of  building  very  complex  structures  layer  by 
layer - is a fundamental technology.
It  is  as  fundamental  to  the  Digital  Revolution  as  metalworking  was  to  the  Industrial  Revolution.  I  don't  believe  it's 
going to be replaced. But I could be wrong; I could be too tied up in my own technology.
What about quantum computing or building computers with nanotechnology?

Page 3 of 3
Moore's almanac; * FUTURE SHOCK RESHAPE I.T.
 
I'm sceptical about this, too, but it's closer to what we do than the DNA stuff. Quantum devices may be the ultimate 
transistors.
The transistor doesn't behave very well when you get down to very small dimensions, but that gets into the realm 
where things like quantum devices start working.
We may make the transition to a kind of quantum device that keeps this whole trend going. Quantum devices are 
pretty  far  out,  and  a  lot  of  work  has  to  be  done.  They're  far  enough  away  that  they're  beyond  my  tenure  in  this 
industry - a couple of decades from now.
Is there ever a point where you see so many problems ahead, you just want to give up?
Engineers  thrive  on  problems.  They  are  trained  to  solve  problems.  When  they  run  out  of  problems,  they  become 
very frustrated.
I see. So you're just loving this?
Yeah, this is great stuff!
Classification
Language: ENGLISH
Publication-Type: Newspaper
Subject: RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT (79%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (72%); Company/Intel (%)
Company:  INTEL CORP (96%)
Ticker: INTC (NASDAQ) (96%)
Industry: NAICS334413 SEMICONDUCTOR & RELATED DEVICE MANUFACTURING (96%); 
MICROPROCESSORS (90%); SEMICONDUCTOR MFG (90%); SEMICONDUCTORS (90%); MANUFACTURING 
(89%); COMPUTER EQUIPMENT (79%); COMPUTER CHIPS (74%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (72%); 
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY (63%)
Person: GORDON MOORE (92%)
Geographic: SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (79%); SYDNEY, AUSTRALIA (74%); AUSTRALIA (74%)
Load-Date: July 23, 2007
End of Document