

 
A quantum leap for computers?; quantum computers; includes related 
article on quantum cryptography
Science
July 7, 1995
Copyright 1995 Gale Group, Inc.
All Rights Reserved
ASAP
Copyright 1995 American Association for the Advancement of Science.Due to publisher request, Science cannot be reproduced until 360 days 
after the original publication date.
Section: Pg. p28(2); Vol. V269; No. N5220; ISSN: 0036-8075
Length: 2253 words
Byline: Glanz, James
Body
ABSTRACT
Computer  scientists  are  discovering  that  'quantum  parallelism'  may  be  used  to  perform  calculations  almost 
instantaneously  that  would  takemore  than  a  billion  years  on  conventional  computers.  Research  indicating  that 
quantum computers could be built is described.
Computer scientists pride themselves on their logic--after all, logic gates are their stock in trade. But lately some of 
them have been looking a bit like Alice down the rabbit hole: wide-eyed at the paradoxes that prevail in an entirely 
new  realm  of  computing.  The  new  worldthey've  disappeared  into  is  the  realm  of  the  tiny--individual  atoms  and 
quanta of light.
In that strange world, quantum mechanics reigns, and the same rules that let a particle be in many places at once 
allow it to perform many computational tasks simultaneously. "It's almost like magic," says Dan Simon of Microsoft 
Corp. in Redmond, Washington, one of the researchers whose work has shown that "quantum parallelism" can be 
exploited  to  perform  in  a  few  seconds  certain  calculations  that  would  take  billions  of  years  on  the  most  powerful 
classical computers.
Over the past few months, a growing appreciation of this paradoxicalworld and its accompanying magic has led to 
an outpouring of articles, proposals, and conferences on the topic--including a workshop in Torino, Italy, last week. 
Appropriately  for  a  Rabbit  Hole  world,  "things  are  out  of  control,"  jokes  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology 
researcher  Seth  Lloyd.  And  the  whirlwind  could  get  wilder  with  the  news  that  at  least  rudimentary  quantum 
computers (QCs) can actually be built.
In  one  of  three  papers  on  QCs  in  the  15  May  Physical  Review  Letters  (PRL),  Ignacio  Cirac  of  the  University  of 
Castilla-La  Mancha  in  Spainand  Peter  Zoller  of  the  University  of  Innsbruck  in  Austria  show  that,  in  theory,  ions 
trapped in an electric field and cooled to fractions of a degree above absolute zero could be coupled to produce a 
quantum  logic  gate--the  working  heart  of  a  computer.  And  researchers  at  the  National  Institute  of  Standards  and 
Technology (NIST) in Boulder have already built and tested a simplified version of their suggestion.
Before the Cirac-Zoller paper, says Richard Hughes of Los Alamos National Laboratory, most theorists' suggestions 
for building QCs "seemed like they required 'unobtainium'--a material that didn't exist." Now, he says, the idea "isn't 
so  crazy."  Still,  like  Alice,  these  researchers  are  finding  that  the  Rabbit  Hole  has  its  drawbacks.  Among  themare 
sharp  limits  on  the  sorts  of  computations  a  QC  could  perform  andthe  exquisite  sensitivity  of  quantum  systems  to 

Page 2 of 5
A quantum leap for computers?; quantum computers; includes related article on quantum cryptography
 
slight errors. Such errors--which can stem from unwanted interactions with the "normal" world outside the system--
could make the concept unworkable, some researchers say.
Much of the strangeness that dominates the world of QCs can be traced to the super-position principle, which holds 
that a quantum-mechanical system--say, an atom with several possible energy states or spin directions--can exist 
simultaneously  in  all  of  them  until  the  states  are  actually  measured.  While  a  classical  data  bit,  represented  by 
voltages in a semiconductor, can carry only one value--a binary 0 or 1--an atom can carry both values at once, with 
0  corresponding  to  its  ground  state,  say,  and  1  to  its  excited  state.  Likewise,  two  quantum  bits,  or  "qubits,"  can 
simultaneously  hold  all  combinations  of  their  values--(0,0),  (1,0),  (0,1),  and  (1,1)--and  a  collection  of  n  qubits  can 
hold [2.sup n] sets of values at a time.
Bursts  of  light,  say,  can  flip  the  bits  in  various  ways,  independently  changing  each  part  of  a  superposition  to  a 
different  value,  and  interactions  among  these  bits  can  in  principle  create  logic  gates  that  let  calculations  proceed 
down  many  paths  at  once.  When  the  calculation  is  finished,  information  about  it  can  be  extracted--measured--
againusing light pulses.
Looked at in this way, QCs "are in a sense just reinterpretations ofspectroscopy," says David DiVincenzo of IBM'S 
Thomas J. Watson Research Center in Yorktown Heights, New York. In nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, 
for  example,  radio  frequency  pulses  flip  atomic  spins.  The  operation  is  generally  exploited  to  probe  the  atoms' 
chemical  environment,  but  it  also  amounts  to  a  logical  NOT  operation  on  a  qubit,  says  DiVincenzo--an  operation 
that changes a bit's value from 0 to1 or vice versa.
What's  more,  instead  of  flipping  the  qubits  completely,  certain  pulses  can  "tip"  them  into  the  superpositions  of  0s 
and  1s  that  take  advantage  of  quantum  parallelism.  But  the  qubits,  like  the  bits  in  a  conventional  computer,  still 
need  to  be  coupled  to  create  the  logic  gatesof  a  computer,  in  which  the  state  (or  states,  in  this  case)  of  one  bit 
affects the state of another.
And  there  quantum  mechanics  throws  up  a  big  stumbling  block.  To  forma  logic  gate,  the  qubits  have  to  "interact 
strongly  with  each  other  and  weakly  with  the  outside  world,"  says  Rolf  Landauer,  also  at  IBM.  An  outside 
interactions  act  as  a  "  measurement,"  causing  superposed  quantum  mechanical  states  to  "collapse"  into  a  single 
state  and  undoing  the  advantage  of  a  QC.  And  coupling  qubits  without  measuring  them  "is  a  tall  order,"  says 
Landauer.
Making qubits count
Last  year,  however,  Peter  Shor  of  AT&T  Bell  Laboratories  in  Murray  Hill,  New  Jersey,  came  up  with  just  the 
incentive physicists needed tofill that order. Building on work by Microsoft's Simon, Shor found aquantum algorithm 
for quickly factoring numbers so huge that they might take the age of the universe to factor on classical machines. 
Quantum logic, says Shor, makes it possible to sort through a space of solutions that grows exponentially with the 
size of the number to be factored.
"Before Shor's algorithm, there was no concrete evidence that you could do something interesting with a quantum 
computer  that  you  couldn't  do  with  a  classical  computer,"  says  Simon.  The  result  could  shake  up  the  science  of 
cryptography, in  which the  latest  schemes  are  based  on  the  difficulty of  factoring  large numbers (see box).  And  it 
concentrated the minds of researchers looking for ways to wire qubits together into a complete logic gate.
It  was  after  listening  to  a  talk  on  QCs  by  Artur  Ekert  of  Oxford  University--a  co-author,  along  with  David  Deutsch 
and  Adriano  Barenco  ofOxford,  of  one  of  the  recent  PRL  papers--that  Cirac  and  Zoller  realized  that  a  line  of  ions 
chilled  to  fractions  of  a  kelvin  in  an  electrostatic  trap  could  serve  as  a  "quantum  wire"  for  passing  information 
without measuring it. The key, they realized, is the ions' shared motion; coupled by their electric charges, they can 
rock in synchrony, like a chorus line.
The  rocking  motion  is  itself  quantized  into  ground  and  excited  states  that  can  encode  qubit  information.  The 
challenge, Cirac and Zoller realized, was getting information from one qubit onto this wire, thenmoving it along the 
wire to another qubit. They took advantage of the fact that the internal energy states of the ions, just like the rocking 

Page 3 of 5
A quantum leap for computers?; quantum computers; includes related article on quantum cryptography
 
motion  of  the  whole  line,  can  be  regarded  as  quantum-mechanical  pendulums  that  have  known  oscillation 
frequencies.
Cirac  and  Zoller  hypothesized  that,  if  a  small  laser  beam  were  focused  on  an  individual  ion  and  tuned  to  a 
frequency equaling the difference between the ion's internal frequencies and those of the rocking motion, it would 
set up a resonance between ion and wire--in effect, opening up a connection. The ion's qubit information could be 
imprinted on the wire's motional states, without any need for a measurement to determine what that information is. 
Irradiating a second ion with the proper frequencies could transfer quantum information from the wire to the ion; the 
procedure could also make the ion's bit flip or notflip depending on the state of the first ion.
"They've figured out a way to have any ion interact with any other ion on the chain," says Tycho Sleator, a physicist 
at  New  York  University.  "It's  a  beautiful  piece  of  work."  Already  NIST's  Chris  Monroe  and  David  Wineland  have 
tested part of the scheme by swapping quantum information between the rocking motion and a single ion, and they 
havewritten  a  proposal  to  do  factoring--of  the  number  15--using  Shor's  algorithm.  The  hardware  requirements? 
"About  10  ions,"  says  Wineland.  In  the  final,  read-out  stage  after  the  quantum  calculation,  a  burst  of  laser  light 
would cause the ions holding Is to glow and leave thoseholding 0s dark, like the display of a 1950s-vintage digital 
computer.
This isn't the only effort to make the Wonderland machine come true.Other experimentalists, such as Jeff Kimble at 
Caltech,  are  pursuingentirely  different  schemes,  attempting  to  couple  atoms  to  photons,  which  would  act  as  the 
"wires."  But  amid  all  these  advances,  skeptics  continue  to  raise  serious  questions  about  the  ultimate  feasibility 
ofQCs. Calculations show, for instance, that small errors in a QC can accumulate exponentially during its operation, 
and no one has yet figured out a satisfactory way of reaching into the quantum world to correct them. The problem 
is "pretty severe at first glance," says William Unruh of the University of British Columbia in Vancouver.
And there may be limited incentive to solve it, because so far, Shor's factoring algorithm remains the only scheme 
for putting quantum wonders to work on a practical challenge. "There's no question that Shor's procedure works," 
says IBM's DiVincenzo. But, he asks, "is it just some accident"--not a technique that will be generally applicable to 
other problems? For now, though, QC researchers are finding too many delights in the Wonderland realm to want to 
go home.
RELATED ARTICLE: Keeping Secrets Safe From Quantum Code-Cracking
Quantum computers, with their potential for cracking codes based on the factors of large numbers, could threaten 
the  peace  of  mind  of  spies,  diplomats,  and  others  bent  on  secret  communications  (see  main  text).  But  quantum 
mechanics can also make amends, as a recent breakthrough by Richard Hughes and his colleagues at Los Alamos 
National  Laboratory  shows.  At  a  conference  held  last  month  at  the  University  of  Rochester  in  New  York,  Hughes 
announced  that  the  group  had  transmitted  information  through  14  kilometers  of  optical  fiber  by  encoding  it  in  the 
quantum properties of photons, where the quantum mechanical uncertainty principle shields it from observation by 
eavesdroppers.
Hughes's  work  isn't  the  first  demonstration  of  quantum  cryptography,as  it  is  known.  But,  for  the  record,  it's  the 
longest, surpassing by40% a previous effort by a team at British Telecom and the Defense Research Agency in the 
United Kingdom. Still more impressive, says Charles Bennett, a pioneer in quantum encryption at IBM's Thomas J. 
Watson  Research  Center  in  Yorktown  Heights,  New  York,  Hughes  didn't  send  his  message  through  a  high-tech 
custom-built system. Instead, he sentthe perishable quantum states through existing fiber "out with the chipmunks" 
on the grounds of Los Alamos.
Like  other  quantum  cryptography  schemes,  Hughes's  provides  a  way  forpeople  in  different  locations  (usually 
dubbed  Alice  and  Bob  by  cryptographers)  to  develop  a  key  that  either  can  use  to  decode  messages  sent  via  an 
unsecured public channel. The apparatus isolates individualphotons, then uses a fiber-optic splitter to divide each 
photon's quantum-mechanical wave function--which gives the odds that the photon exists at any particular point in 
space--into halves. Before its 14-kilometer journey, the split wave function passes through separate short lengths of 
optical fiber; differences in the path lengths alter the timing of the two pulses, encoding information that "Alice" can 
transmit to "Bob."

Page 4 of 5
A quantum leap for computers?; quantum computers; includes related article on quantum cryptography
 
Instead of using the split pulses to send a definite key--which could be intercepted--Alice and Bob create one in the 
course of their quantum communication. They independently choose strings of random binary numbers. Alice then 
sends quantum pulses to Bob in which her 0s areencoded with one particular phase shift and her Is with another.
With a split path arrangement of his own, Bob can add a phase shift to the pulses received at his end. Knowing how 
Alice is encoding her 0s and 1s, he calibrates the shifts so that whenever his string callsfor a 1 but Alice has sent a 
0, or vice versa, the pulses will end up with a net offset of half a wavelength. In that case, the pulses will interfere 
destructively and Bob's detector will not see a photon. If the numbers agree, however, the pulses will be offset by a 
different  amount  and  Bob  will  sometimes  measure  a  photon--but  only  sometimes,  for  this  is  quantum  mechanics. 
Through an unsecure channel, he letsAlice know when he measured a photon, and they build up a key consisting of 
the shared numbers corresponding to these photons.
Meanwhile,  if  an  eavesdropper--Eve  for  short--tries  to  tap  into  the  quantum  channel,  she  will  find  it  impossible  to 
cover her tracks. Because of quantum mechanical uncertainty, she won't be able to reconstruct the exact sequence 
of pulses she intercepted. If Bob and Alice share some of their key, the jig will be up.
Playing both Alice and Bob roles, Hughes was able to transmit and receive information with an error rate of roughly 
1%.  Future  efforts  tosend  quantum  code  over  even  greater  distances,  though,  may  run  up  against  the  constraint 
that  quantum  signals  can  never  be  amplified  without  altering  them.  But  Bennett  thinks  further  improvements  in 
detectors and quantum cryptography schemes might eventually allow those benton secrecy to "just bury fibers and 
thumb their noses" at potential eavesdroppers.
Graphic
 
photograph
chart
illustration
Classification
Language: ENGLISH
Publication-Type: Magazine
Journal Code: 1300 ASAP
Acc-No: 17286200
Subject: COMPUTER SCIENCE (90%); QUANTUM COMPUTING (90%); QUANTUM MECHANICS (90%); 
SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (90%); PHYSICS (89%); EXPERIMENTATION & RESEARCH (79%); TECHNICIANS 
& TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (79%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (78%); GOVERNMENT RESEARCH 
FUNDING (75%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (73%); CRYPTOLOGY (73%); STANDARDS & 
MEASUREMENTS (62%); Academic (%); Quantum electronics Innovations (%); Computers Innovations (%); Digital 
computers Innovations (%); Cryptography Innovations (%)

Page 5 of 5
A quantum leap for computers?; quantum computers; includes related article on quantum cryptography
 
Company:  MICROSOFT CORP (70%)
Organization: MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY (55%)
Ticker: MSFT (NASDAQ) (70%)
Industry: NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (70%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (70%); 
COMPUTER SCIENCE (90%); QUANTUM COMPUTING (90%); CRYPTOLOGY (73%); SCIE Science and 
technology (%)
Geographic: TURIN, ITALY (75%); WASHINGTON, USA (79%); NEW MEXICO, USA (78%); CASTILLE-LA 
MANCHA, SPAIN (54%); ITALY (55%); AUSTRIA (54%)
SPECIAL-FEATURE: MI File 47
EVENT: Innovations
CROSS-OVER: ACD
CROSS-OVER: HIO
CROSS-OVER: MGZ
CROSS-OVER: NSH
Load-Date: March 20, 2008
End of Document