

 
THE CUTTING EDGE; 
 QUANTUM LEAPS; 
 AS LIMITS ON CHIP SIZE AND PRICE NEAR, AN EXOTIC TECHNOLOGY 
OFFERS HOPE
Los Angeles Times
May 12, 1997, Monday,
Home Edition
Copyright 1997 Times Mirror Company
Section: Business; Part D; Page 1; Financial Desk; Infobox
Length: 2414 words
Byline: MICHAEL A. HILTZIK, TIMES STAFF WRITER  
Dateline: PALO ALTO
Body
You've probably heard about the year-2000 problem, which holds that billions of dollars' worth of business software 
will crash at the moment of the millennium.
But how about the year-2010 problem?
"Right now I view the year 2010 as a very dark curtain," Stanley Williams says. "And I don't know what's behind it."
It's no accident that Williams sounds slightly apocalyptic.
As   principal   laboratory   scientist   of   Hewlett-Packard   Laboratories   here,   Williams   counts   among   his   chief 
responsibilities determining exactly what lies behind the dark curtain of 2010. For that's when current technological 
trends are finally expected to lead to a computer chip too small to work (and too expensive to manufacture).
The  fortunes  of  the  $  132-billion  semiconductor  industry--and,  by  extension,  a  large  chunk  of  the  world's 
increasingly  technology-driven  economy--rest  on  piercing  the  2010  curtain  and  learning  how  to  commercialize 
whatever lies behind it.
Semiconductors  are  the  materials  and  devices  that  power  computers  and  countless  other  electronic  devices  in 
home, office and factory.
Over the last 30 years, the semiconductor industry has relied on the axiom that computing devices would continue 
shrinking  in  size  and  increasing  in  power  at  an  exponential  rate  according  to  what  is  known  as  Moore's  Law.  As 
articulated by Gordon Moore, one of the founders of semiconductor giant Intel Corp., the law states that computing 
power will roughly double in scale (or halve in price) every two years.
This is the trend that has led to computers packing hundreds of times more power into a desktop PC than once fit 
into computers so big they were operated by teams of men walking around their innards.
Most computer professionals have long understood that such an exponential increase in power could not continue 
indefinitely; at some point the very laws of physics would interfere. Accordingly, most of the debate about Moore's 
Law has been over when, not if, it would break.

Page 2 of 6
THE CUTTING EDGE;  QUANTUM LEAPS;  AS LIMITS ON CHIP SIZE AND PRICE NEAR, AN EXOTIC 
TECHNOLOGY OFFERS HOPE
 
Today  the  smart  money  says  that  silicon-based  computing  devices  have  about  four  generations  left,  "with  every 
generation  representing  a  quadrupling  of  transistors  on  a  chip  and  a  25%  gain  in  speed,"  Williams  says.  That 
means chips with a basic device size of 0.07 micron, or about three times as detailed as the circuits on today's most 
advanced chips.
"Most people believe that's basically it," Williams says.
Most,  but  not  all.  Some  experts  argue  that  many  functions  of  today's  chips  will  continue  to  improve  even  as 
miniaturization passes the 0.07-micron limit. Others say that advances in networking and communications will take 
up the slack in enhancing computing performance.
Indeed,  the  demise  of  Moore's  Law  has  been  forecast  before,  only  to  be  deferred  for  decades  by  sudden  and 
unheralded advances in technology.
"There's a lot of punch left in Moore's  Law," says S. Atiq Raza, chief technical officer at Advanced Micro Devices 
and  the  developer  of  that  company's  well-received  new  K6  microprocessor.  He  acknowledges,  however:  "We  are 
hitting a wall of how far we can push silicon technology."
*
Two basic trends are coming together to mark the end of "classical" semiconductor design. One is the sheer cost of 
the extraordinarily precise machines needed to fabricate smaller and more elaborate chips.
The price of chip factories, or "fabs," as they are known in the industry, long ago passed the $ 1-billion mark. One 
plant to be opened in Dresden by Advanced Micro Devices in 1999 will cost $ 1.9 billion.
Industry experts say that at current rates of growth, the price of a fab will hit $ 10 billion or even $ 25 billion soon 
after  the  turn  of  the  century.  At  that  point,  the  cost  of  manufacturing  computer  chips  becomes  almost  a  political 
issue,  for  there  may  be  no  single  company--or  perhaps  just  one--with  the  money  to  erect  a  facility  that  costly. 
Overcoming that hurdle may require an unprecedented level of research and development cooperation among chip 
makers and industry suppliers.
The  second  limiting  factor  is  more  fundamental:  the  behavior  of  the  electron.  Electronic  devices  such  as 
microprocessors  work  essentially  by  sending  streams  of  charged  electrons  over  circuits  and  through  logic  "gates" 
designed to switch "on" or "off" depending on whether a current is present or not.
The configuration of these gates makes up the basic architecture of the integrated circuit and thus of the computer 
itself,  performing  the  functions  of  addition,  subtraction  and  other  mathematical  processes  at  the  heart  of  digital 
computing.
Today's chips need several hundred electrons at a time to switch the gates. As the chips become smaller, fewer are 
needed. That's good, because it means the chips consume less power and generate less heat as they operate.
But it's also bad. The fewer the electrons needed to switch the gate, the more troublesome the background noise.
Think of a water faucet: One can create a pulse of water by turning it on and off. The faster and shorter the bursts, 
the more they blend together, because one burst may not hit the drain before the next one is sent by the open tap. 
Eventually it becomes almost impossible to tell where one burst ends and the next begins. Similarly, a circuit gate 
switched by 10 electrons may not know whether it is reading a deliberate burst of current or simply an irregular but 
ever-present parade of stray ions.
"When you start getting down to the tens of electrons , you have a problem with statistics," says Williams. "Is five 
electrons 'on' or 'off'? When you're talking about such small numbers, one in every 100 gates will be in an unknown 
state, and that's unacceptable."

Page 3 of 6
THE CUTTING EDGE;  QUANTUM LEAPS;  AS LIMITS ON CHIP SIZE AND PRICE NEAR, AN EXOTIC 
TECHNOLOGY OFFERS HOPE
 
Then  there's  the  "quantum  effect."  At  subatomic  levels,  the  deterministic  rules  of  classical  physics  codified  by  Sir 
Isaac Newton break down. At these infinitesimal distances and in isolation, electrons stop acting like marbles being 
meekly herded through a maze of circuitry.  Their behavior becomes unpredictable and at times bizarre.
Electrons  subject  to  quantum  forces  behave  sometimes  like  particles  and  sometimes  like  waves.  They  can 
transmute  through  solid  matter,  unexpectedly  reverse  their  charge  and  even  seem  to  be  in  many  places  at  once. 
They don't act predictably, but only according to a range of probabilities.
Quantum  mechanics  is  perhaps  the  most  confounding  field  in  science  today--as  it  has  been  since  it  was  first 
observed in 1913. Among those who felt left behind was Albert Einstein, who famously objected to its probabilistic 
nature with the words "I am convinced that God does not throw dice."
But  to  many  scientists,  quantum  mechanics  may  yet  be  the  savior  of  digital  computing.  Because  quantum  effects 
inevitably  creep  into  the  behavior  of  electronic  devices  when  they  are  sufficiently  small,  researchers  are  hard  at 
work on ways to harness, rather than overcome, them.
"Quantum effects are a pain in the butt," says Seth Lloyd, a physicist at the mechanical engineering department of 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. "They make impossible things happen. So the reasoning is, if you can't beat 
them, use them."
This   research   is   following   several   related   paths,   all   built   around   the   quantum   phenomenon   known   as 
"superposition."
Stated simply, this seemingly implausible notion means that an electron in a quantum state can represent not only 
"on"  or  "off"--the  "1"  or  "0"  of  digital  language--but  both  positions  simultaneously.  This,  theoretically,  allows  an 
electron in effect to perform hundreds of calculations at once.
*
That's the theory. The reality is today the subject of vigorous research at Caltech, Stanford, MIT and other top-level 
laboratories around the world.
"We're fighting on two fronts," says James S. Harris, a professor of electrical engineering and director of the solid-
state  laboratory  at  Stanford,  whose  students  have  succeeded  in  isolating  individual  electrons  for  quantum 
computing experiments. "Can you make a device that works on a single electron, and how can you use it?"
Both questions can be answered, at least theoretically. Devices can be made, at least under laboratory conditions, 
and some uses have already suggested themselves.
One is in factoring large numbers, an important application in the field of cryptology. Factoring is one of a family of 
mathematical  problems  that  increase  exponentially  in  complexity  as  the  digits  at  hand  increase,  meaning  they 
quickly outpace the calculating power of conventional computers--even supercomputers.
Take  the  factoring  of  a  100-digit  numeral  (that  is,  identifying  the  whole  numbers  that  are  its  divisors).  As  Hewlett-
Packard's  Williams  observes,  even  a  computer  much  faster  than  anything  built  today  would  need  longer  to 
complete  this  process  by  the  simplest  means  possible,  dividing  by  consecutive  integers,  than  the  age  of  the 
universe.
"But a quantum computer could do it instantaneously," Williams says.
Still, the practical obstacles to exploiting these theories are enormous. They include the exotic conditions necessary 
to  isolate  electrons  and  keep  them  in  a  quantum  state;  most  manipulation  of  electrons  requires  temperatures 
approaching absolute zero (273 degrees below zero Centigrade), and devices that are only a few atoms deep and 
wide in size.

Page 4 of 6
THE CUTTING EDGE;  QUANTUM LEAPS;  AS LIMITS ON CHIP SIZE AND PRICE NEAR, AN EXOTIC 
TECHNOLOGY OFFERS HOPE
 
Then  there's  the  issue  of  error  correction,  which  takes  on  a  whole  new  meaning  in  the  quantum  realm.  Quantum 
computers turn out millions of wrong answers along with the correct answers, and thus require ingenious methods 
to distinguish right from wrong.
Yet,  recent  developments  have  made  researchers  more  confident  than  ever  before  that  these  problems  can  be 
solved.
"It's looking better and better in terms of testing the feasibility and coming to a conclusion about whether this is for 
real or not," says Nabil Amer, who is head of the experimental effort at IBM's Almaden Research Center south of 
San Jose into fabricating so-called ion traps, which confine single electrons. "Very good people are getting into this 
business."
Harris'  group,  for  example,  has  fabricated  a  single  electronic  transistor,  or  "quantum  dot,"  that  works  at  room 
temperature. Advances in scanning electron microscopes give researchers virtually an atom's-eye view of their own 
handiwork.
But perhaps the most promising development was announced earlier this year by Neil Gershenfeld, a researcher at 
MIT,  and  Isaac  Chuang,  currently  at  Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory.  Building  on  earlier  research,  they  showed 
how nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, a widely available and easy-to-use technology, could be utilized to 
manipulate atomic nuclei of molecules to produce a computational answer.
The importance of the Chuang-Gershenfeld finding is that it shows that quantum computing does not always require 
isolated electrons, which are so hard to corral. Instead, it works even better when trillions of molecules are jostling 
one another all at once as in, say, a cup of room-temperature liquid.
Quickly  dubbed  "computing  in  a  coffee  cup,"  the  theory  holds  that  the  error  messages  of  the  great  mass  of 
molecules  in  the  cup  will  cancel  each  other  out,  leaving  just  enough  molecules  to  produce  an  identifiably  right 
answer.
*
Each  molecule  in  the  computing  soup,  as  it  were,  has  a  magnetic  "spin"  of  a  plus  or  a  minus--"1"  or  "0"  in  digital 
terms. NMR, which produces a magnetic field, could be used to manipulate those spins by applying pulses of radio 
waves that can flip the spins of certain molecules from plus to minus or vice versa.
As Lloyd, who has done pioneering research in the field, puts it, flipping a molecular spin by applying a stimulus like 
a  radio  frequency  is  exactly  analogous  to  instructing  a  digital  transistor  to  switch  from  "on"  to  "off"  by  applying  an 
electrical current--the way classical computers work.
By observing and controlling how different molecules react to different frequencies and to their neighbors, one can 
construct increasingly complex logic devices, gradually reaching a level that matches or surpasses the complexity 
of today's computers, but that are smaller and faster.
Refining  the  techniques  of  manipulating  these  quantum  bits  and  reading  their  answers  is  still  enormously  difficult, 
researchers caution. But many say that Chuang and Gershenfeld have cleared up a problem that confounded the 
field.
"If you'd asked me three months ago how long it would be before we could do anything with quantum computing, I'd 
have said 25 years," says Williams. "But now I'd say we can do it now."
As for how to use quantum computing, experts are entranced by the prospect of applications thus far unimagined.
"There are many things we're using today in ways that were not originally intended," says Amer. "Once we have the 
capacity in hand, we'll see what it's good for."

Page 5 of 6
THE CUTTING EDGE;  QUANTUM LEAPS;  AS LIMITS ON CHIP SIZE AND PRICE NEAR, AN EXOTIC 
TECHNOLOGY OFFERS HOPE
 
*
Hiltzik writes frequently about technology. He can be reached via e-mail at michael.hiltzik@latimes.com.  
Going It Alone
TODAY: THE CONVENTIONAL TRANSISTOR
In  a  classical  semiconductor  transistor,  a  current,  or  flow  of  electrons,  moves  from  "source"  to  "drain"  along  a 
negatively charged channel surrounded by a positively charged material. Applying voltage to the "gate" widens the 
channel,  allowing  more  electrons,  or  current,  to  flow;  reducing  or  removing  the  voltage  cuts  off  the  flow,  thus 
allowing the drain to register whether the transistor is switched on or off.
TOMORROW: THE SINGLE ELECTRON?
A  quantum  dot,  otherwise  known  as  a  single  electron-transistor,  is  designed  to  trap  a  single  electron,  whose 
fluctuations  in  energy  state  function  roughly  the  way  a  current  does  in  classical  transistors.  In  this  example, 
researchers  have  deposited  a  tiny  rectangle  of  titanium  oxide  (yellow)  on  a  base  of  pure  titanium  (red).  A  single 
electron can be induced to tunnel through the barriers onto the island, where its charge is powerful enough to keep 
other  electrons  from  joining  it.  This  structure,  however,  works  reliably  only  at  temperatures  hundreds  of  degrees 
below zero Fahrenheit.
Sources: Stanford University; MITI Electrotechnical Lab, Tsukuba, Japan
The Shrinking Microprocessor
Advances  in  chip-making  technology  are  expected  to  continue  to  shrink  the  size  of  a  chip's  "features,"  or 
transistors, over the next 13 years and allow a corresponding increase in the number of transistors per chip.   
          Minimum  Transistors 
          feature   per cubic 
            size,  centimeter, 
 Year  in microns  in millions 
 1995        0.35       4 
 1998        0.25       7 
 2001        0.18      13 
 2004        0.13      25 
 2007        0.10      50 
 2010        0.07      90 
* A micron is one-thousandth of a millimeter.
Source: Semiconductor Industry Assn.
Graphic
 
PHOTO: Nabil Amer heads IBM's effort to fabricate electron "traps." PHOTO: Below, a laser is used to calibrate the 
trapping  device  at  the  company's  facility  near  San  Jose.    PHOTOGRAPHER:  MATT  BLACK  /  For  The  Times 
GRAPHIC-DRAWING:  Going  It  Alone,  LORENA  INIGUEZ  /  Los  Angeles  Times  GRAPHIC-TABLE:  The  Shrinking 
Microprocessor / Los Angeles Times

Page 6 of 6
THE CUTTING EDGE;  QUANTUM LEAPS;  AS LIMITS ON CHIP SIZE AND PRICE NEAR, AN EXOTIC 
TECHNOLOGY OFFERS HOPE
 
Classification
Language: English
Subject: TRENDS (89%); DIGITAL ECONOMY (78%); TECHNOLOGY TRENDS (78%); SCIENCE & 
TECHNOLOGY (77%); BUSINESS SOFTWARE (73%); PHYSICS (70%)
Company: INTEL CORP  (84%);  HEWLETT-PACKARD CO  (57%); INTEL CORP  (84%);  HEWLETT-PACKARD 
CO  (57%)
Ticker: INTC (NASDAQ)  (84%);  HPQ (NYSE)  (57%)
Industry: NAICS334413 SEMICONDUCTOR & RELATED DEVICE MANUFACTURING  (84%);  NAICS334118 
COMPUTER TERMINAL & OTHER COMPUTER PERIPHERAL EQUIPMENT MANUFACTURING  (57%); 
SEMICONDUCTOR MFG (91%); SEMICONDUCTORS (91%); COMPUTER EQUIPMENT (90%); ELECTRONICS 
(90%); ELECTRONICS INDUSTRY REGULATION & POLICY (90%); MICROPROCESSORS (89%); COMPUTER 
SOFTWARE (78%); DIGITAL ECONOMY (78%); COMPUTER CHIPS (77%); PERSONAL COMPUTERS (76%); 
BUSINESS SOFTWARE (73%); YEAR 2000 PROBLEM (72%); DESKTOP COMPUTERS (70%)
Person: GORDON MOORE (79%)
Load-Date: December 21, 1998
End of Document