

 
Infinite wisdom
THE WEEKEND AUSTRALIAN
November 29, 1997, Saturday
Copyright 1997 Nationwide News Pty Limited
Section: FULLPAGE, REVIEW; Pg. R30
Length: 992 words
Byline: Damien Broderick
Body
If these books are right, our understanding of life will be changed for good
..
The Life of the Cosmos By Lee Smolin, Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 358pp, $39.95
..
 The Fabric of Reality By David Deutsch, Allen Lane, 390pp, $45
..
 LET'S not  beat  about  the  bush  these  are  two of  the  most dazzling  books  of this century.  If their basic claims are 
correct, our understanding of life, mind and the cosmos itself will never be the same.
 Why is the universe shaped the way it is? Precisely what shape is it, anyway?
Most of us have never understood quite how large the answers might prove to be.
MATP
Lee  Smolin,  a  leading  gravitational  physicist,  and  David  Deutsch,  one  of  the  world's  top  quantum  computation 
theorists, claim in their distinct ways that to resolve these questions satisfactorily we must venture into the infinite.
 They  are  not  talking  about  deity,  however.  Smolin's  story  involves  infinities  of  time,  cosmos  succeeding  cosmos, 
universes birthing baby universes that bang and expand and fade into attenuated death or perhaps crush into fiery 
nothing -but not before giving birth to billions of new baby space-times of their own, from black-hole wombs.
 The  core  idea  is  the  discovery,  crucial  to  quantum  theory,  that  the  vacuum  emptiness  -is  unstable,  liable  to  emit 
energetic particles. At high enough energies, this flaw in emptiness can buckle inward to form a black hole, which 
may then inflate wildly into a fresh space-time, creating an entire segregated cosmos.
Depending  on  the  interaction  laws  coded  into  that  cosmos,  it  might  recollapse  in  a  tiny  fraction  of  a  second,  or 
bubble with micro-black holes that collapse in turn, or even blow out into a starry space-time universe akin to our 
own.
 Imagine, then, a fabulous series of bubbles popping in the void. Most vanish without progeny. Some persist long 
enough for their colossal outpouring of energy to form elemental vibrating strings and membranes, and for those to 
coalesce into quarks and electrons, and then into hydrogen and helium atoms.

Page 2 of 3
Infinite wisdom
 
 If the values describing the new universe (perhaps inherited from its parent) are suitable, its contents will form stars 
that  cook  new,  heavier  elements  in  their  compressed  gases.  Some  of  these  stars,  rich  in  carbon  and  other  key 
elements,  will  explode  in  thermonuclear  glory,  their  cores  sucked  down  to  fecund  black  holes,  their  hot  debris 
seeding the skies with the raw materials of life and new stars.
 In  a  few  universes,  Smolin  speculates,  an  extraordinary  set  of  basic  vales  will  coincide,  yielding  two  interesting 
features: a maximal number of stars suitable for making black holes (and hence new universes with slightly variant 
parameters), and many other stars and their planets suitable for evolving life, and even intelligence.
 A  key  and  contentious  step  in  this  Darwinian  argument  is  that  the  parameters  determining  the  shape  of  the  new 
cosmos must resemble those of its parent, rather than being picked at random.
 Granting  this,  after  a  while  most  universes  in  the  mega-cosmos  will  cluster  around  certain  apparently  arbitrary 
values -the kind that, luckily, produce observers like us. And the beauty of Smolin's cosmogony is that it's testable. 
It moves out of the domain of faith and into that of science.
 Deutsch's  shocking  idea  is  even  more  resistant  to  the  mind's  clutch:  he  sees  every  event  literally  doubled  and 
reduplicated,  with  small  crucial  variations,  in  trillions  upon  trillions  of  diverging  parallel  realities,  spread  through 
infinite lateral time. If you're having a bad hair day, cheer up -there's another version of you, in a universe at right 
angles to this one, who's doing just fine. And a zillion more, it's true, taking up every conceivable alternative position 
in between. Some of them are dead. Some are on Mars. A few are sharing Graceland with Elvis, who is married to 
Princess Di, or perhaps to John Lennon.
 Neither of these remarkable postulates is freshly minted by Deutsch or Smolin.
Baby universes go back more than a century, Smolin tells us, to Charles Peirce, semiologist and pragmatist, while 
the  many  worlds  hypothesis  was  proposed  in  1957  by  Hugh  Everett  III,  who  -in  this  universe  -died  in  1982.  Until 
now, though, nobody had pursued these striking notions with such ruthless intellectual attack, following them all the 
way down.
 Deutsch, curiously, insists that his outrageous version of reality ought not surprise us, or at least physicists, since it 
is  simply  the  best  theory  available  to  science  (quantum  mechanics)  taken  perfectly  literally  without  metaphysical 
evasions.
 In  a  brilliantly  effective  display,  he  argues  that  something  as  ordinary  as  the  splash  of  illumination  shone  by  an 
electric  torch  on  a  wall  can't  be  explained  without  acknowledging  that  a  sort  of  "shadow  light"  from  many  other 
adjacent universes is leaking into our own, interfering with the beam we see and blurring its bright sharp disc into 
concentric rings.
 In  those  universes,  naturally,  a  few  photons  from  our  local  universe  also  leak  across.  "It  follows,"  Deutsch  notes, 
"that reality is a much bigger thing than it seems, and most of it is invisible." Even so, the multitude of overlapping 
histories is needed to explain some of the most basic features of our ordinary world.
 Deutsch  argues  ingeniously  that  DNA  sequences  performing  a  given  coding  function  in  different  adjacent  worlds 
must  be  closely  similar,  while  so-called  "junk  DNA"  that  litters  chromosomes  will  vary  at  random.  This  truly  weird 
interpretation of basic science lies, for Deutsch, at the heart of an emerging fourfold theory of everything we know 
(which  is  only  a  small  part  of  everything,  admittedly).  It  will  condense  our  understanding  of  evolution,  theories  of 
knowledge  and  the  quantum,  and  computation.One  of  the  founders  of  quantum  computing,  Deutsch  is  no  New 
Ager. His extravagant ideas are worth taking very seriously indeed.
 Damien  Broderick's  new  book  on  the  impact  of  future  science  is  The  Spike:  Accelerating  into  the  Unimaginable 
Future.
Classification

Page 3 of 3
Infinite wisdom
 
Language: ENGLISH
Subject: PHYSICS (90%); QUANTUM MECHANICS (90%); REPORTS, REVIEWS & SECTIONS (90%); 
ASTRONOMY & SPACE (74%); EVOLUTION THEORY (74%); PREGNANCY & CHILDBIRTH (72%); QUANTUM 
COMPUTING (69%)
Industry: QUANTUM COMPUTING (69%); INDUSTRIAL GASES (60%)
Load-Date: March 1, 2002
End of Document