

 
The Impossible Beam
The New York Times
December 23, 1997, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final
Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 19; Column 2; Editorial Desk ; Column 2; ; Op-Ed
Length: 697 words
Byline: By Lawrence M. Krauss; 
Lawrence M. Krauss is chairman of the physics department at Case Western Reserve and author of "Beyond Star 
Trek: Physics From Alien Invasions to the End of Time."
By Lawrence M. Krauss;  Lawrence M. Krauss is chairman of the physics department at Case Western Reserve 
and author of "Beyond Star Trek: Physics From Alien Invasions to the End of Time."
Body
The phone rings at 6:15 A.M. In my stupor, I pick it up and hear: "Good morning, Rock Radio 690 here! Is this the 
professor who wrote the 'Star Trek' book?" My caller, it seems, has an urgent question: "Have you heard about the 
news reported from Austria on quantum teleportation of photons?"
This  may  sound  like  a  weird  dream  (or  nightmare,  depending  upon  your  attitude  toward  physics),  except  that  it 
actually  happened.  A  group  of  European  scientists  have  destroyed  a  single  particle  of  light  in  one  place  and 
reproduced it instantly somewhere else in their lab, the equivalent of teleportation.
You  may  have  missed  the  news,  but  be  assured  that  few  Trekkers  did.  Let's  go  back  in  time  30  years.  Gene 
Roddenberry, the creator of "Star Trek," didn't have the budget to show a starship landing on a different planet each 
week. So when he was asked how the crew would get down to where the action was, he responded, "We'll beam 
them down!" Thus was the Transporter born, and the phrase "Beam me up, Scotty" soon became a part of popular 
culture.
And  why  not?  Who  wouldn't  want  to  be  transported  instantly  to  their  destination  without  having  to  endure  lost 
luggage and packed planes? But there is a problem: the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle of Quantum Mechanics 
states that we can never simultaneously measure exactly where each particle in your body is and what it is doing. 
Clearly we need to know both things if we are to re-create your body exactly, atom by atom.
Or  do  we?  The  experimental  physicist  Anton  Zeilinger  and  his  colleagues  in  Austria,  following  on  an  original 
proposal  by  an  American  physicist,  Charles  Bennett,  and  his  colleagues  at  I.B.M.,  showed  that  it  is  precisely 
possible  to  destroy  an  individual  particle  --  in  this  case  the  quantum  of  light  called  a  photon  --  in  one  place  and 
instantly (yes, faster than the speed of light!) transfer its properties exactly to another photon on the other side of 
the room -- or, if you set things up correctly, on the other side of the galaxy! This is the stuff that dreams are made 
of,  which  explains  the  early  morning  phone  calls  with  the  burning  question,  How  long  might  it  be  before  we  could 
transport a person?
Well,  sadly,  the  answer  still  is,  probably  never.  Quantum  mechanics  tells  us  that  elementary  particles  carry,  in 
essence, much more information than we can get ahold of in a single measurement and, moreover, that measuring 

Page 2 of 2
The Impossible Beam
 
them inevitably changes them in the process -- the root of Heisenberg's principle. The clever researchers in Austria 
and the United States were able to get around the Heisenberg principle by never actually measuring the first photon 
before destroying it and transferring its identity.
They  did  so  by  exploiting  the  quantum  mechanical  nature  of  the  elementary  particles  themselves:  if  undisturbed, 
they  can  carry  and  transfer  information  that  is  not  directly  accessible  by  the  measurement  process.  But  this  trick 
won't  work  with  people,  or  any  large,  classical  objects,  where  this  extra  information  would  be  washed  out  by 
interactions before you could transfer it.
So, is all of this in the end mere gamesmanship by physicists who try to exploit the eccentricities of nature for their 
own  amusement?  Not  really.  The  techniques  of  quantum  teleportation  may  not  make  air  travel  obsolete.  But  as 
computers  become  smaller,  these  same  techniques  may  allow  the  development  of  "quantum  computers,"  which 
directly exploit the quantum weirdness of nature at its smallest scales to perform calculations in seconds that would 
require present-day computers longer than the age of the universe. Indeed, I claim that this very sort of technique 
will change 21st-century technology more than any single development has affected technology in the 20th century.
My  own  hyperbole  notwithstanding,  perhaps  the  prospect  of  quantum  computing  doesn't  seem  as  exciting  as 
teleportation. What would it take to make it so? Perhaps the realization that such computers might re-create another 
popular vision from the Big Screen. With potentially faster computers comes the possibility of intelligence and self-
awareness, and with that comes the possibility of HAL, or perhaps his less malevolent cousin, Data. Stay tuned.
Graphic
 
Photos (Amy Franceschini)
Classification
Language: ENGLISH
Subject: PHYSICS (90%); QUANTUM MECHANICS (90%); REPORTS, REVIEWS & SECTIONS (79%); 
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (73%)
Company: LET'S GO PUBLICATIONS INC  (56%); LET'S GO PUBLICATIONS INC  (56%)
Geographic: AUSTRIA (90%); UNITED STATES (86%)
Load-Date: December 23, 1997
End of Document