

 
SCIENCE FILE / AN EXPLORATION OF ISSUES AND TRENDS AFFECTING 
SCIENCE, MEDICINE AND THE ENVIRONMENT; 
 SCIENTISTS TAKE SUBATOMIC ROUTE TO SUPERCOMPUTERS; 
 INNOVATION: BY APPLYING PRINCIPLES OF QUANTUM MECHANICS, 
RESEARCHERS HOPE TO BUILD MACHINES THAT CAN CARRY OUT 
ENORMOUS NUMBERS OF CALCULATIONS AT THE SAME TIME.
Los Angeles Times
December 25, 1997, Thursday,
Home Edition
Copyright 1997 Times Mirror Company
Section: Metro; Part B; Page 2; Metro Desk; Infobox
Length: 1315 words
Byline: K.C. COLE, TIMES SCIENCE WRITER  
Body
Physicists like simple things: billiard balls that collide in precise, predictable trajectories. Gently rolling sine waves 
that undulate with comforting uniformity through light and sound and trembling Earth. Equations that pare a problem 
down to its bare roots, exposing the simple, naked truth underneath. E=mc 2 . F=ma.
They like simple schemes for classifying everything in the universe, and simple recipes for cooking it up. So it's no 
wonder  that  physicists  tend  to  freak  out  when  the  cosmos  gets  unfathomably  complicated.  Take  the  1950s,  for 
example,  when  new  "fundamental"  particles  were  proliferating  like  rabbits,  produced  by  the  power  of  newly 
developed "atom smashers."
Physicist Enrico Fermi sniffed: "If I could remember the names of all these particles, I would have been a botanist."
The discovery of quantum mechanics--that unruly inner world of the atom--turned out to be even harder to accept. 
In the quantum world, particles don't stay put like billiard balls, but bounce unpredictably around, obeying only the 
laws of probability. They can be two places at once, and penetrate impossible barriers.
Einstein  said  that  if  quantum  mechanics  turned  out  to  be  the  true  nature  of  reality,  he  would  have  rather  been  a 
cobbler or even worked in a gambling casino than be a physicist.
Physicist  Erwin  Schroedinger  reportedly  said:  "If  one  has  to  stick  to  this  damned  quantum  jumping,  then  I  regret 
having ever been involved in this thing."
Now,  some  physicists  at  Caltech  have  taken  that  very  "damned  quantum  jumping"  and  turned  it  into  a  possible 
solution for some basic problems in computing, they said in a recent briefing.
In effect, they've taken a liability and made it an asset. They turned the jittery uncertainty of the quantum world into 
a promising new approach to handling huge, previously unmanageable, problems.
The  fact  is,  some  things  are  just  too  complicated  to  compute--no  matter  how  powerful  your  computer.  A  classic 
example of such a so-called hard problem is the "traveling salesman" question. If a salesman has to visit stores in, 
say, 30 cities, how does he arrange his trip in order to travel the fewest possible miles?

Page 2 of 4
SCIENCE FILE / AN EXPLORATION OF ISSUES AND TRENDS AFFECTING SCIENCE, MEDICINE AND 
THE ENVIRONMENT;  SCIENTISTS TAKE SUBATOMIC ROUTE TO SUPERCOMPUTERS;  INNOVAT....
 
If  you  try  to  calculate  all  the  possible  routes  in  such  problems,  the  task  becomes  impossible.  "It's  easy  enough  in 
theory to count up all the paths the salesman could take ," says Caltech physicist Stephen Koonin.  "But even if you 
could count a billion paths per second, you'd still need a million times the age of the universe to do it."
If  the  salesman  decides  to  add  another  city  to  his  list  at  the  last  minute,  the  number  of  possible  solutions  to  his 
routing problem grows faster than exponentially.
Figuring  out the  most  efficient  way  to  connect  cities  (or  anything  else) is  critical in countless  real  world  situations. 
How does the telephone company best link phones, for example? How does a company distribute its goods?
Other  hard  problems  abound  in  mathematics.  Many  have  far-reaching  real  world  implications  for  everything  from 
encryption of state secrets to solving problems in fundamental physics.
Recently, scientists have realized that the complexity of the quantum world may be just the thing to match wits with 
hard problems. They're using the very same uncertainty that made Einstein throw his hands up in despair to build 
massively parallel subatomic computers.
A so-called quantum computer would work by dividing up hard problems into a virtually infinite number of bit-sized 
pieces that could be solved simultaneously. The approach works because any subatomic particle always exists in 
many states at once. If a particle is spinning along one axis, for example, it's also spinning at all other possible axes 
at the same time. Only when it's measured does it "decide" how it's really spinning.
As a rough analogy, think of a spinning coin. Is it heads or tails?  Well, it's both until you stop the spinning. Then it 
becomes one or the other.
In the same way, a particle's energy coexists in many different states at once. So do other properties of quantum 
particles. Instead of being here or there, these subatomic multiple personalities are partly here, partly there, partly 
this, partly that, partly heads, partly tails.
Quantum computers would take advantage of this complexity to allow a computer to carry out enormous numbers 
of calculations at the same time.  Instead of encoding numbers in bits, these computers would use quantum bits--or 
q-bits--which contain all the possible quantum states.
In  effect,  calculating  on  a  quantum  computer  would  be  like  calculating  on  both  sides  of  a  spinning  coin  at  the 
same time--except that quantum states are far richer and more varied than simply heads or tails.
"What gives quantum computing power is the ability to do many things at once," Koonin said. "You put in atoms 
that are superimpositions of all possible states at once. So, in a sense, you do all possible calculations at once."
Where normal computers are stuck in the digital world of ones and zeros, quantum computers could--theoretically 
at least--have nearly infinite power.
Of course, none of this is close to applications, and there are countless theoretical and practical problems. For the 
time  being,  the  scientists  at  Caltech  (and  other  institutions)  are  approaching  the  challenge  from  many  different 
angles--from  exploring  mathematical  codes  to  devising  error-correcting  mechanisms  to  building  actual  primitive 
quantum circuits.
"Nobody  knows  how  this  is  going  to  shake  out,"  said  Caltech  physicist  Jeff  Kimble,  who's  actually  building  crude 
quantum circuits. "But it's a safe bet--if humanity survives long enough--that we will have quantum computers."
Quantum  mechanics  has  always  seemed  too  spooky  to  be  practical.  And  yet  it  led  to  the  entire  microelectronics 
revolution--from transistors to semiconductors. So who knows? Maybe the physicists will put quantum weirdness to 
everyday use again.

Page 3 of 4
SCIENCE FILE / AN EXPLORATION OF ISSUES AND TRENDS AFFECTING SCIENCE, MEDICINE AND 
THE ENVIRONMENT;  SCIENTISTS TAKE SUBATOMIC ROUTE TO SUPERCOMPUTERS;  INNOVAT....
 
If  they  do,  it  won't  be  the  first  time  that  complexity  has  made  a  harder  problem  simpler.  Einstein  himself  showed 
how  the  universe  is  much  easier  to  understand  in  four  dimensions  rather  than  three,  and  some  physicists  today 
believe that it's simpler still in 11 or even 12 dimensions of space and time.
So  it's  encouraging  that  scientists  are  coming  to  terms  with  complexity.  After  all,  the  yearning  for  orderly 
arrangements often led physicists astray. Johannes Kepler struggled for decades to shoehorn the elliptical orbits of 
planets  into  perfect  circles  that  would  stack  neatly  inside  geometric  shapes--like  Cinderella's  stepsister  trying  to 
squeeze  her  big  fat  foot  into  the  slim  glass  slipper.  He  wasn't  successful  either,  but  he  did  discover  the  laws  of 
planetary motion in the process.
These  days,  physicists  are  studying  many  complex  phenomena  that  were  considered  beyond  their  reach  only  a 
decade  ago--from  clouds  to  chaos  to  the  human  mind.  If  physicists  still  don't  love  complexity,  at  least  they've 
learned to appreciate its sometimes surprising potential.
Complexity Made Simple
Physicists  at  Caltech  hope  to  turn  the  uncertainty  of  quantum  theory  into  a  new  approach  to  handling  huge, 
previously unmanageable problems.
Quantum Mechanics
A particle's energy coexists in many different states at once and can be quantified only as it exists when measured. 
Think of a spinning coin.  Is it heads or tails? It's both until it stops spinning.
The Traveling Salesman Problem
Programmed to recognize all possible outcomes at once, quantum computers could carry out enormous numbers 
of calculations at the same time.
In fact, they would be able to solve challenging tasks like this one:
*
If a salesman has to visit stores in 30 cities, how does he decide which roads to take to cover the shortest distance?
The  Quandary:  Finding  an  answer  seems  simple  enough.  But  even  with  the  fastest  computers  such  calculations 
become  increasingly  difficult  with  each  new  variable,  eventually  becoming  unsolvable  within  a  reasonable  time 
span.
Graphic
 
GRAPHIC-DRAWING:  Complexity  Made  Simple,  Los  Angeles  Times  GRAPHIC-MAP:  Complexity  Made  Simple, 
Los Angeles Times
Classification
Language: English
Subject: PHYSICS (96%); QUANTUM MECHANICS (91%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (90%); PARTICLE 
PHYSICS (79%); BOTANY (70%)

Page 4 of 4
SCIENCE FILE / AN EXPLORATION OF ISSUES AND TRENDS AFFECTING SCIENCE, MEDICINE AND 
THE ENVIRONMENT;  SCIENTISTS TAKE SUBATOMIC ROUTE TO SUPERCOMPUTERS;  INNOVAT....
 
Industry: CASINOS (53%)
Load-Date: December 21, 1998
End of Document