

 
QUANTUM COMPUTERS TO MAKE GIANT LEAP leap leap
$%Charleston Gazette (West Virginia) virginia) virginia)
February 23, 1997, Sunday sunday sunday
Copyright 1997 Charleston Newspapers newspapers newspapers
Section: News; Pg. P3C P3C P3C
Length: 642 words
Byline: George Johnson new york times service service service
Body
In the never-ending effort to make sense of the universe, the human
brain long ago bumped up against its limits. Brains learned to amplify
themselves with pencils and paper, slide rules, calculators and
electronic computers.
Eventually, humans will reach the physical limits of computation
because the signals inside a computer cannot travel faster than light.
What is needed is another great technological leap. In the last few few few
years, a steady accumulation of both theoretical and experimental
breakthroughs has raised hopes that just such an invention is within
the realm of possibility.
By harnessing the peculiar logic called quantum mechanics that governs
the world inside atoms, scientists are trying to invent a radically
different kind of computing: an information-processing method so
powerful that it would be to ordinary computing what nuclear energy is
to fire.
"Just a few years ago, it was thought that quantum computing was
impossible," said Dr. Raymond Laflamme, a physicist at Los Alamos
National Laboratory in New Mexico. "Now we have passed some big
stumbling blocks."
Theorists recently proved that by manipulating subatomic particles as
though they were beads in an abacus, a quantum computer could in

Page 2 of 3
QUANTUM COMPUTERS TO MAKE GIANT LEAP leap leap
 
principle crack problems that now seem impenetrable. Buoyed by this
possibility, experimenters have begun to build the first rudimentary
components - each as small as a single atom - needed to make such a
machine.
Even the fastest conventional supercomputer, primed with the cleverest
software, would take hundreds of millions of years to examine a
300-digit number and find all its factors, the numbers it can be
evenly divided by. But a quantum computer, if one could be
constructed, would perform the task in minutes.
Since the codes used to protect military and commercial secrets rely
on the near-impossibility of factoring large numbers, the National
Security Agency, the government's premier code-making and
code-breaking department, has begun closely following the field.
The key to this new kind of computation is a phenomenon called quantum
superposition. Consider the case of an electron hovering around the
nucleus of an atom. According to quantum mechanics, the electron
cannot be said to be in a single definite position. It exists instead
in a kind of limbo, a superposition that consists of every possible
location it could occupy.
Only when the electron is measured, or somehow disturbed by the
outside world, does the superposition break down: the particle
crystallizes from the quantum haze and becomes fixed in space and
time. It is this process, called quantum decoherence, that gives rise
to the everyday world in which things can be in only one place at a
time.
Hard as they are to imagine, quantum effects lie at the root of the
most familiar phenomena. Think of a beam of light bouncing off a spot
on a mirror. The angle at which the light beam strikes the mirror
equals the angle at which it is reflected. But behind the scenes,
there is much more going on.

Page 3 of 3
QUANTUM COMPUTERS TO MAKE GIANT LEAP leap leap
 
Light is made of particles called photons, and photons obey quantum
rules. Defying all common sense, the photons in the light beam can be
thought of as simultaneously bouncing off every single point on the
mirror's surface as though they were trying out all the many possible
paths. Some of these paths reinforce each other, while most cancel
each other out.Ultimately, all that is left is the single trajectory
that is observed.
In a similar way, a quantum computer would be capable of a powerful
kind of parallel processing that goes far beyond what is possible with
even the most advanced digital machines. In a quantum computer, all
the calculations needed to solve a problem could be performed
simultaneously, like the photons trying out every possible path as
they are reflected by a mirror. Most of these calculations would
cancel out, leaving the correct answer to the problem.  problem.  problem.
Classification
Language: ENGLISH english english
Subject: QUANTUM COMPUTING (91%); PHYSICS (90%); QUANTUM MECHANICS (90%); SCIENCE & 
TECHNOLOGY (78%); PARTICLE PHYSICS (72%)
Company: LOS ALAMOS MONITOR  (56%);   #ENDSEG## #ENDSEG## ##ENDSEG##; LOS ALAMOS 
MONITOR  (56%);   #ENDSEG##  NATIONAL LABORATORY  (64%);   64%); ATORY  (64%);  ATORY  (64%);   
64%); 64%);
Organization: NATIONAL LABORATORY  (64%);   64%); 64%);
Industry: QUANTUM COMPUTING (91%); COMPUTER EQUIPMENT (90%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (73%)
Geographic: NEW MEXICO, USA (87%)
Load-Date: February 25, 1997
End of Document