

 
Tiny Magnets May Form Basis For Computing Breakthrough
The New York Times
January 27, 1997, Monday, Late Edition - Final
Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Business/Financial Desk 
Section: Section D; ; Section D; Page 2; Column 5; Business/Financial Desk ; Column 5; 
Length: 609 words
Byline: By JOHN MARKOFF 
By JOHN MARKOFF 
Body
An international team of scientists plans to announce today the discovery of a material that may one day become 
the  foundation  of  an  entirely  new  approach  to  computing,  making  possible  machines  hundreds  of  thousands  of 
times as fast as today's supercomputers.
The  researchers,  from  the  Xerox  Corporation,  the  University  of  Barcelona  in  Spain  and  the  City  College  of  New 
York,  plan  to  announce  the  creation  of  a  microscopic  magnet,  one  molecule  in  size,  derived  from  a  special 
combination of manganese, oxygen, carbon and hydrogen.
A  computer  data  storage  system  based  on  such  a  magnet  could  alone  pack  data  thousands  or  millions  of  times 
more densely than today's memory and storage systems.
The  behavior  of  the  material  also  holds  out  the  more  remarkable  possibility  that  the  new  molecule  might  one  day 
become the basic building block underlying an approach to computing known as quantum computing, which until 
now has been discussed only in theoretical terms.
While  today's  digital  computers  are  based  on  systems  composed  of  millions  of  switches  capable  only  of  being  in 
"on" and "off" states, scientists have since the early 1980's speculated about a new kind of computing based on a 
radically different kind of physics derived from the world of quantum mechanics.
Used  to  describe  interactions  in  the  microscopic  world  of  atomic  structures,  quantum  physics  might  one  day  help 
create  a  computer  in  which  a  single  atom  switching  between  many  different  quantum  states  could  simultaneously 
perform different operations, thereby speeding up computations to a hitherto unthinkable scale.
The  research  team  said  the  new  material  was  a  crystalline  substance  that  consists  of  clusterlike  structures  of  12 
manganese  and  12  oxygen  atoms  surrounded  by  chemical  groups  found  in  ordinary  vinegar.  Using  magnets  the 
size of these molecules, it might some day be possible to store hundreds of gigabytes of data in an area no larger 
than  the  head  of  a  pin,  the  team  said.  A  gigabyte  is  equal  to  the  amount  of  information  on  62,500  typed,  double-
spaced pages.
The  research  team  said  that  the  new  molecules  had  exhibited  a  physical  phenomenon  called  quantum  magnetic 
hysteresis,  in  which  material  can  contain  multiple  magnetic  states  at  the  same  time.  That  might  one  day  make  it 
possible to create a tiny device that would hold multiple bits of data simultaneously, unlike today's memory building 
blocks, which can hold only one bit at a time. To be sure, the researchers were quick to point out that they had not 
actually figured out how to read or write information from the tiny new molecules yet.

Page 2 of 2
Tiny Magnets May Form Basis For Computing Breakthrough
 
"We  haven't  made  working  memory  devices  yet,"  said  Ronald  F.  Ziolo,  a  chemist  with  Xerox's  Wilson  Center  for 
Research and Technology, based in Webster, N.Y. "And no one has yet figured out how this might be done."
He said that scientists had considered the possibility of using light as a device for reading and writing information 
from  the  small  molecules.  The  research  team  was  formed  about  two  years  ago  after  researchers  from  Xerox  and 
the  University  of  Barcelona  presented  papers  at  a  European  conference  on  quantum  materials  sponsored  by 
NATO.
The  brute  speed  of  a  machine  based  on  quantum  principles  could  be  used  to  solve  many  complex  computing 
problems,  but  might  also  raise  new  ones.  For  example,  it  could  undercut  things  like  today's  data-  scrambling 
technology,  which  is  based  on  the  fact  that  conventional  computers  require  many  years  to  factor  very  large 
numbers  that  are  the  products  of  pairs  of  large  prime  numbers.  A  quantum  computer  might  be  able  to  do  the 
factoring in a reasonable period of time, thereby putting a powerful tool in the hands of thieves.      
Classification
Language: ENGLISH
Subject: PHYSICS (90%); QUANTUM MECHANICS (90%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (90%); CHEMISTRY 
(89%); EXPERIMENTATION & RESEARCH (78%); QUANTUM COMPUTING (78%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES 
(78%)
Company: XEROX CORP  (84%); XEROX CORP  (84%)
Ticker: XRX (NYSE)  (84%)
Industry: NAICS334118 COMPUTER TERMINAL & OTHER COMPUTER PERIPHERAL EQUIPMENT 
MANUFACTURING  (84%);  NAICS333316 PHOTOGRAPHIC & PHOTOCOPYING EQUIPMENT 
MANUFACTURING  (84%);  NAICS333244 PRINTING MACHINERY & EQUIPMENT MANUFACTURING  (84%); 
DATA STORAGE TECHNOLOGY (90%); COMPUTER EQUIPMENT (78%); QUANTUM COMPUTING (78%); 
DATA STORAGE DEVICES (75%)
Geographic: BARCELONA, SPAIN (58%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); CATALONIA, SPAIN (58%); SPAIN (58%)
Load-Date: January 27, 1997
End of Document