

 
Harnessing the power of quantum computing: Early stages: There's a huge 
gulf between what quantum computers can do in theory and what they can 
do in practice.
The Ottawa Citizen
June 10, 1997, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION
Copyright 1997 CanWest Interactive, a division of CanWest Global Communications Corp. All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. C6
Length: 775 words
Byline: TOM STANDAGE; THE DAILY TELEGRAPH
Dateline: LONDON
Body
What will the computers of the future be like? In the short term, it's not too hard to predict: if current trends continue, 
the high-end desktop PC of 2007 will probably have four 999MHz processors, 512Mb of RAM, and 2,000 gigabytes 
of storage.
But what about the long term?
According to some researchers, far more powerful computers could be built by firing laser beams at trapped atoms, 
or  radio  pulses  into  a  cup  of  hot  coffee.  Those  are  just  two  techniques  doing  the  rounds  in  the  bizarre  field  of 
quantum  computing.  Researchers  gathered  in  London  last  month  to  discuss  the  latest  developments  in  what  has 
become one of the most extraordinary areas of computer research.
The  idea  of  quantum  computing  was  first  put  forward  by  Nobel  prize-winning  physicist  Richard  Feynman  in  1982, 
but  was  purely  a  matter  of  theoretical  interest  until  1994  when  Peter  Shor,  a  researcher  at  Bell  Laboratories, 
showed that a quantum computer could crack codes far faster than conventional machines. For example, that year 
it took 1,600 workstation computers eight months to factorize a 129-digit number -- the kind of difficult operation that 
is relied upon to ensure the security of modern cryptography.
At that rate, factorizing a 1,000-digit number would take 10 million billion billion years -- billions of times longer than 
the  age  of  the  universe.  But  Mr.  Shor's  work  predicted  that  a  relatively  simple  quantum  computer  could  do  it  in 
about 20 minutes.
Suddenly,  quantum  computing  was  a  hot  topic  --  because  if  a  quantum  computer  could  be  built,  it  would  turn  the 
world  of  computing  (not  to  mention  cryptography)  on  its  head.  But  so  far,  the  most  complicated  thing  anyone  has 
got a quantum computer to do is add one and one to get two.
There's a big difference between what the speeds quantum computers are capable of in theory and what they can 
do in practice.
Building a quantum computer is difficult because the very thing that makes it so powerful -- its reliance on bizarre 
subatomic goings-on governed by the laws of quantum mechanics -- also makes it very fragile and hard to control. 
Classical  computers  store  values  as  binary  digits  (bits)  that  can  be  0  or  1.  Quantum  bits  (known  as  qubits)  can 
represent both 0 and 1 simultaneously, so a single qubit can be involved in two calculations at once.

Page 2 of 3
Harnessing the power of quantum computing: Early stages: There's a huge gulf between what quantum 
computers can do in theory and what they can do in practice.
 
Two qubits can carry out four operations at once, three eight, and so on. The more qubits you have, the more of a 
speed-up due to "quantum parallelism" you get, leading to potentially mind-boggling performance.
But  since  qubits  can  exist  only  at  a  subatomic  level,  operating  a  quantum  computer  is  fiendishly  fiddly.  One 
approach is to use individual atoms cooled to very low temperatures to store each qubit, and painstakingly targeted 
laser  beams  to  manipulate  them.  Another  approach  uses  nuclear  magnetic  resonance  (NMR)  techniques  to 
manipulate atoms within a solution of organic molecules -- such as the caffeine molecules found in coffee. It was a 
simple quantum computer built along these lines that recently calculated one plus one.
Dr.  David  Deutsch,  of  the  Clarendon  Laboratory  in  Oxford,  England,  who  first  put  quantum  computing  on  a  firm 
theoretical foundation, believes quantum computing is inevitable, as components on today's chips cannot get much 
smaller without running into quantum effects themselves.
But, he adds: "From the moment Newton's laws were discovered, it was known that in principle we could go to the 
moon. But it was 300 years before we did." Deutsch compares the current state of quantum computing to classical 
computing in 1948, when the transistor was invented.
"There were useful inventions that involved one transistor, like a radio," he says.
"Then there came applications that used six or 10 transistors, and it took 20 years before you could have thousands 
of transistors on a chip and make a useful computing device out of it.
"There are quantum mechanical devices short of a fully fledged quantum computer which are useful, and do things 
that are classically impossible."
He  points  out  that  quantum  computing  has  already  produced  useful  spin-offs,  such  as  quantum  cryptography 
("something a classical computer cannot do") and more accurate atomic clocks.
"But  what  is  important  here  is  not  the  final  destination  but  the  journey,"  says  his  co-researcher,  Artur  Ekert. 
"Imagine  if  you'd  gone  into  Charles  Babbage's  study  in  the  19th  century  and  asked  him  what  his  computer  was 
good for. He'd have said for tabulating logarithms -- he couldn't have imagined the Internet, or word processing, or 
games. With anything new you don't really know where it will take you."
Classification
Language: ENGLISH
Subject: QUANTUM COMPUTING (93%); COMPUTER SCIENCE (90%); QUANTUM MECHANICS (90%); 
TRENDS (89%); COMPUTATIONAL RESEARCH (76%); PHYSICS (76%); LASERS (73%); NOBEL PRIZES 
(73%); CRYPTOLOGY (71%); AWARDS & PRIZES (68%)
Company: BELL LABORATORIES  (56%); BELL LABORATORIES  (56%)
Industry: SIC3661 TELEPHONE & TELEGRAPH APPARATUS  (56%); QUANTUM COMPUTING (93%); 
COMPUTER EQUIPMENT (90%); COMPUTER SCIENCE (90%); DESKTOP COMPUTERS (78%); PERSONAL 
COMPUTERS (78%); DATA STORAGE TECHNOLOGY (77%); COMPUTATIONAL RESEARCH (76%); LASERS 
(73%); CRYPTOLOGY (71%)
Geographic: LONDON, ENGLAND (74%)

Page 3 of 3
Harnessing the power of quantum computing: Early stages: There's a huge gulf between what quantum 
computers can do in theory and what they can do in practice.
 
Load-Date: June 11, 1997
End of Document