

 
COMPUTING IN A COFFEE CUP? SOME PHYSICISTS THINK ULTRA-FAST 
QUANTUM COMPUTERS CAN BE BUILT, AND A WARM, ORGANIC LIQUID 
COULD BE THE MEDIUM.
San Jose Mercury News (California)
MARCH 4, 1997 Tuesday MORNING FINAL EDITION
Copyright 1997 San Jose Mercury News  All Rights Reserved
Section: SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY; Pg. 1F
Length: 1805 words
Byline: JANET RAE-Dupree, Mercury News Staff Writer
Body
WE CAN build computers powerful enough to simulate a nuclear explosion, but even our most whizbang machines 
still can't calculate fast enough to predict tomorrow's weather.
Here's  the  problem:  Today's  computers  still  do  their  calculating  sequentially,  counting  on  their  digital  fingers  and 
chewing  on  one  bit  of  information  before  moving  at  light  speed  to  the  next  one.  Even  "massively  parallel" 
supercomputers - machines built with myriad processors to strip apart a problem and mull it over in chunks - can't 
hack  through  science's  most  cosmic  problems  fast  enough  to  be  useful.  Why  bother  asking  the  fastest 
supercomputer a question if it's still going to take centuries to spit out a response?
But a quantum computer - an entirely different animal altogether, one that does its figuring in the subatomic world 
- now that would be fast. A quantum computer could take a question and examine all possible answers - the right 
ones and the wrong ones - virtually at once. In theory anyway, the right answers would rise to the top like cream on 
milk, ready for the skimming.
If only researchers could figure out how to build one.
They're working on it. While quantum computers once were a philosophical conundrum mulled over by theoretical 
physicists  over  a  round  of  beers  after  work,  they  recently  have  come  under  increasingly  intense  professional 
attention. One proposal even theorizes that such a computer could do its calculating inside a mug of coffee.
No one laughs anymore at the idea that researchers here and elsewhere may one day build this fanciful machine.
The  barriers  are  huge.  Ironically,  the  reasons  for  the  difficulties  lie  in  the  same  quantum  physical  laws  that  would 
make such a machine possible in the first place.
The study of quantum physics over the last few decades has taught researchers the arcane rules of the subatomic 
road. Quantum theorists trying to describe these rules to the uninitiated inevitably use the word "counter-intuitive" - 
a fancy way of saying it just doesn't make sense.
"Anyone  who  is  not  shocked  by  quantum  theory  has  not  understood  it,"  said  Niels  Bohr,  a  Danish  physicist  who 
helped build the first nuclear bomb.
Most of the "real world" thinks you can only be in one place at one time. We also believe that particles are simply 
bits of matter.

Page 2 of 5
COMPUTING IN A COFFEE CUP? SOME PHYSICISTS THINK ULTRA-FAST QUANTUM COMPUTERS CAN 
BE BUILT, AND A WARM, ORGANIC LIQUID COULD BE THE MEDIUM.
 
But  in  the  quantum  world,  these  are  the  rules:  Elementary  particles  -  things  like  electrons  or  the  photon  particles 
that  make  up  a  beam  of  light  -  behave  both  as  particles  and  as  waves.  Theorists  believe  that  electrons  hovering 
around an atom's nucleus follow every possible path at once; the electron can't be said to have followed any one 
path until it's actually observed. Elementary particles in a sense can be in every possible place at the same time. 
This strange state is called "superposition," and it's an important part of how researchers hope to build a quantum 
computer.
In today's digital computing, each bit of information is either a 1 or a 0. It's either on or off, open or closed. It can't 
be something in between.
Infinite combination
But  in  the  quantum  world,  a  particle  can  be  every  possible  combination  of  the  two  states.  It's  neither  1  nor  0.  It's 
both.  This  quantum  bit  -  called  a  qubit  -  could  in  theory  be  linked  up  with  other  qubits  to  create  a  quantum 
computer.
Quantum reality creates a serious problem, however. Once you observe the qubit - the moment you measure it - it 
fundamentally changes. Observation draws the qubit out of the quantum world. It becomes either a 1 or a 0. And 
your computation is blown.
So quantum computers, if they are to be built, must function without outside interference until the precise moment 
when the answer is ready - a moment researchers are learning how to spot.
How  then  can  researchers  be  certain  the  qubits  are  doing  their  calculating  without  making  mistakes?  In 
conventional  computing,  this  so-called  process  of  error  correction  can  be  done  by  pushing  a  bit  back  in  the  right 
direction if it gets flipped the wrong way. If you can't interact with a quantum computer, how are you supposed to 
be certain it's handing out the right answer?
"You  take  one  quantum  bit  (of  information)  and  spread  it  over  five  physical  qubits,"  explains  Peter  Shor,  a 
mathematician  at  AT&T  Labs  Research  in  New  Jersey  who  is  credited  with  reviving  interest  in  quantum 
computers three years ago by proving such a machine could be made to compute. "You've got one qubit encoded 
into five qubits. There's enough redundancy that if one is wrong you can . . . measure how it differs."
A problem of errors
Quantum computing skeptic Rolf Landauer, a researcher at IBM in New Jersey, three years ago asserted that no 
one would ever figure out how to do quantum error correction. He acknowledges that he was impressed when Shor 
proposed  a  way  to  do  so.  But  Landauer  warns  that  Shor's  proposal  hasn't  been  tried  in  large-scale  computations 
and, even if error correction one day is achieved, quantum computing continues to face a daunting array of other 
hurdles.
"My  skepticism  comes  from  (the  difficulty)  in  taking  each  piece  of  information  and  putting  it  through  a  very,  very 
large number of steps," Landauer said. "There's a great question in my mind whether these clever tricks (that Shor 
and  quantum  experimenters  have  come  up  with)  are  adequate  to  handle  a  serious  amount  of  computation.  My 
intuitive judgment is that, no, it's just too difficult a thing to do."
Undaunted,  researchers  are  pushing  ahead.  Several  experiments  have  shown  that  scientists  can  manipulate  the 
basic building blocks that could be used to construct a quantum computer. More experiments are planned.
Among the more intriguing proposals is the one that would create a quantum computer in coffee.
Neil  Gershenfeld  at  the  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology  and  Isaac  Chuang  at  the  University  of  California-
Santa  Barbara,  last  month  released  a  paper  in  the  journal  Science  saying  they  think  they  can  build  a  working  -  if 
limited-use - 10-qubit computer in a warm liquid that contains a variety of different organic molecules.

Page 3 of 5
COMPUTING IN A COFFEE CUP? SOME PHYSICISTS THINK ULTRA-FAST QUANTUM COMPUTERS CAN 
BE BUILT, AND A WARM, ORGANIC LIQUID COULD BE THE MEDIUM.
 
In other words: coffee.
Very  limited  quantum  computations  (such  as  asking  the  computer  to  factor  the  number  15  -  the  answer  is  five 
times  three)  could  be  done  inside  the  tumbling  sea  of  molecules.  The  mug  of  coffee  would  be  placed  in  a  strong 
magnetic  field  and  then  hit  with  radio  frequencies  in  a  process  called  nuclear  magnetic  resonance  spectroscopy. 
NMR currently is used by chemists to study the nature of molecules.
Exploiting magnetic field
In the coffee experiment, the radio pulses would force the nuclei inside the atoms that make up the molecules in the 
mug to "spin" in a specific direction. The spin of an atom tells which way each atom's internal magnet is pointed.
Each molecule then would be made up of perhaps 10 atoms converted by this outside spin control into qubits. The 
hundred billion trillion molecules in the cup each would be a quantum computer, but all the molecules would work 
simultaneously on the same computation.
The qubits - in this case, the nuclei buried inside the atoms - would be protected from outside interference by their 
own electrons, spinning protectively around them.
So far, Gershenfeld and Chuang have gotten a vial of liquid containing molecules of alanine to add one plus one by 
programming  the  radio  frequency  that  controls  the  spin's  direction.  OK,  so  it's  not  even  up  to  being  a  hand 
calculator yet, but it's a start.
Other  experimenters  have  focused  on  the  need  to  isolate  qubits  completely  from  their  environment.  Using 
breathtakingly  small  pieces  of  equipment  called  ion  traps,  they  suspend  quantum  particles  called  ions  -  charged 
atoms or electrons - in a vacuum and then zap them with laser light to turn them into qubits.
Strength in numbers
At the National Institute of Standards and Technology, a team led by David Wineland and Chris Monroe has been 
working with ions of beryllium. Inside the trap, Wineland and Monroe line up the ions like a string of charged pearls 
and then they set it to rocking to and fro.
The  motion  of  the  rocking  string  lets  the  ions  share  quantum  information  up  and  down  the  string's  length, 
undisturbed  by  the  outside  world.  Each  ion  in  the  string  can  be  selectively  programmed  through  different  types  of 
laser light, Wineland said.
"We've taken a baby step with this," he said. "We can do only about 10 operations before it dies. . . . On paper, you 
can have this thing work as well as you want but there's always some external influence causing the manipulations 
we do to be imperfect. Those imperfections cascade through and if we don't do a better job than we're doing now it 
destroys the coherence of the system before you can end a calculation."
Wineland said all quantum computing systems are "far away from this threshold of purity."
"This  isn't  something  you  would  want  to  invest  your  money  in  yet,"  he  said.  "By  anybody's  reckoning  this  is  still  a 
real long shot."
But researchers are plugging away at the problems. Here in San Jose, the Quantum Information Department at IBM 
Almaden Research Center has been working with a different kind of ion trap. Instead of the roughly centimeter-long 
traps  used  by  Wineland  and  Monroe,  the  IBM  team  plans  to  use  "microtraps"  with  cavities  no  bigger  than  the 
diameter  of  two  human  hairs.  Dozens  or  even  hundreds  of  these  microtraps  can  be  made  on  a  wafer-like 
arrangement vaguely similar to today's transistor-packed silicon chips, said department manager Nabil Amer.
Down to individual atoms

Page 4 of 5
COMPUTING IN A COFFEE CUP? SOME PHYSICISTS THINK ULTRA-FAST QUANTUM COMPUTERS CAN 
BE BUILT, AND A WARM, ORGANIC LIQUID COULD BE THE MEDIUM.
 
He  is  planning  an  experiment  using  scanning  tunneling  microscopes  -  devices  capable  of  letting  researchers  see 
and move around individual atoms.
Amer  wants  to  try  quantum  computing  inside  microscopically  small  magnetic  dots,  called  nano-dots,  of  iron  or 
another metal.
The  tip  of  a  scanning  tunneling  microscope  could  be  designed  to  set  the  spin  of  atomic  nuclei  inside  the  dots  in 
much the same way radio frequencies would do in the proposed coffee experiment.
"The appealing thing about this approach, as well as the (coffee) approach, is that you're talking about bulk, not a 
single ion or a few ions in a trap," Amer said. "If this quantum computing is to ever take off, the final approach is 
probably not going to be ion traps. They are not particularly practical, yet they are an excellent tool for testing the 
theory underlying quantum computing."
Wait and see
Nonetheless, Amer notes, there's no way of knowing whether the magnetic dot experiment will work.
Even if all the experiments lead to naught, researchers say, the journey still will have been worthwhile.
"If  nothing  else,  it  drives  traditional  computer  scientists  to  revisit  some  of  their  thinking,  some  of  their  basic 
premises,"  Amer  said.  "We're  still  learning  about  the  basic  science  that's  involved.  .  .  .  We'll  do  our  darnedest  to 
explore it fully so that if it doesn't go anywhere we know that it couldn't have. We don't want to miss anything."
Notes
Cutting Edge
Graphic
 
Photo, Drawing;
PHOTO:PHOTO COURTESY OF RALPH DEVOE, IBM ALMADEN RESEARCH CENTER
An ion microtrap is used by scientists at IBM Almaden Research Center to hold and study charged particles. The 
center hole in the photograph is about six-thousandths of an inch across, or about the diameter of two human hairs. 
The colorful circles are two barium ions inside the center hole.
[970304 ST 1F 2]
DRAWING:Reid Brown, Mercury News Staff Artist
(coffee cup with floating computer parts)[970304 ST 1F 1]
Classification
Language: ENGLISH
Subject: QUANTUM COMPUTING (91%); PHYSICS (90%); QUANTUM MECHANICS (90%); EXPLOSIONS 
(78%); NUCLEAR PHYSICS (78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (73%); MILITARY WEAPONS (50%); 
Computer Future (%)

Page 5 of 5
COMPUTING IN A COFFEE CUP? SOME PHYSICISTS THINK ULTRA-FAST QUANTUM COMPUTERS CAN 
BE BUILT, AND A WARM, ORGANIC LIQUID COULD BE THE MEDIUM.
 
Industry: QUANTUM COMPUTING (91%); COMPUTER EQUIPMENT (90%); SUPERCOMPUTERS (76%); 
MILITARY WEAPONS (50%)
Load-Date: October 21, 2002
End of Document