

 
A LOOK AT HOW WE'LL COMPUTE EXPO PROVIDES 50-YEAR GLIMPSE 
INTO THE FUTURE
San Jose Mercury News (California)
MARCH 4, 1997 Tuesday MORNING FINAL EDITION
Copyright 1997 San Jose Mercury News  All Rights Reserved
Section: FRONT; Pg. 10A
Length: 1219 words
Byline: Mercury News Staff Report
Body
If you thought the last 50 years in computing have been interesting, get ready to be amazed -- and puzzled -- in the 
next half century.
We're all on what promises to be a long and event-filled journey, some of the computing world's top thinkers told a 
high-powered audience Monday in the first session of the three-day ACM97 conference at the San Jose McEnery 
Convention Center.
But don't believe anyone, they indicated, who says they can predict the path we'll be taking.
Matching the human brain
"For  short-term  predictions,  bet  against  the  optimist,"  said  Gordon  Bell,  Microsoft  Corp.  senior  researcher  and  a 
longtime computing innovator. "Long-term, scientifically based predictions have a good chance."
Look  to  engineers  for  short-term  predictions,  Bell  said;  they  tend  to  be  limited  in  their  vision  to  the  one  or  two 
projects in front of them.
Computers could match the processing power of the human brain in 50 years, he said. Such computers would be 
portable, augmenting one's senses by recording the stimuli of everyday life, he said.
"If we can maintain the storage density gains, these things can be worn in various ways and will be no larger than 
pagers," he said. "Pagers, watches, belts, billfolds are at the limit of what's comfortable to be 'on-body.' "
Bell strongly believes in "telepresence" -- the notion that people will attend events not in person but via cyberspace 
-- and he confidently predicted that "the 2047 conference will be in cyberspace, not real space."
Perceptual challenges
A  common  fruit  fly  buzzing  off  the  kitchen  counter  just  ahead  of  your  hand  does  a  better  job  of  processing  visual 
information than a state-of-the-art multiprocessor digital computer.
That intrigues Carver Mead, a professor at the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena, who laid down much 
of the fundamental theory behind today's microprocessors.
He's frustrated that conventional chips aren't getting much better at perception tasks such as hearing and vision -- 
tasks that apparently pose no challenge to simple life forms, such as insects and reptiles, let alone human beings.
"Digital  systems  look  like  the  whole  world  to  us  today,"  Mead  said.  "I  look  on  them  as  the  start  in  a  range  of 
computing systems."

Page 2 of 4
A LOOK AT HOW WE'LL COMPUTE EXPO PROVIDES 50-YEAR GLIMPSE INTO THE FUTURE
 
Mead said it should be possible to mimic the function of what he called the brain's "electrical goo" in a silicon chip. 
A neuron chip would make comparisons between stored images and input from the real world, then report what it 
finds -- a sharp contrast to today's computers, which are essentially built on top of chips that can only manipulate 1s 
and 0s.
Individual software
Someday,  says  Pattie  Maes,  a  message  will  flash  across  our  eyeglasses  that  no  one  else  can  see  --  even  if  it's 
nothing more than "Buy milk."
It would be the work of intelligent agents -- software tailored to our needs. Intelligent agents will help with the things 
that computers are better at than humans, such as jogging a bad memory, digesting and understanding big slugs of 
information or doing several things at once.
Maes,  associate  professor  at  the  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology  Media  Lab,  sees  artificial  intelligence  as 
well-suited to crafting prosthetics for the mind, the extra eyes and ears that we always complain we need.
People  will  have  several  agents,  all  working  together,  she  said.  For  example,  a  "monitoring"  agent  in  your 
refrigerator  could  see  that  you  need  milk  and  tell  your  "remembrance"  agent,  leading  to  that  message  on  the 
glasses. If you wanted to buy a car online, you could tell a "transaction" agent your price range and model choice, 
and that agent could work with a "matchmaking" agent to find other people looking for similar deals.
But she asked, if we rely on agents, will we fail to make mistakes and learn from experience? If we are a sum of our 
memories,  will  we  also  need  agents  to  flesh  out  our  personalities?  Could  remembrance  agents  be  subpoenaed 
when people testify in court that they "don't remember" what happened at a crime scene?
Tomorrow's computers
The ultimate direction of tomorrow's computing will be decided by "unreasonable men," said Joel Birnbaum, head of 
research and development for Hewlett-Packard Co.
"Reasonable men seek to understand the world and adapt themselves to fit within it," he said. "Unreasonable men 
seek to understand themselves, then change the world to adapt to them."
Researchers  already  are  scheming  to  create  tomorrow's  computers,  mind-bogglingly  fast  machines  based  not  on 
electrons  but  on  everything  from  photons  and  atomic  nuclei  to  synthetic  DNA  strands.  The  innovators,  Birnbaum 
said,  are  more  likely  to  be  physicists  and  molecular  biologists,  mathematicians  and  geneticists  than  computer 
scientists.
Anyone  peering  down  the  long-range  road  of  computing,  he  says,  must  allow  for  what  he  calls  "disruptive 
technologies" -- discoveries and innovations so advanced they are unimaginable today. For example, the integrated 
circuit was the disruptive technology that blew away all thought about the future of vacuum-tube computing.
Birnbaum  focused  on  three  possible  innovations:  quantum  computing,  DNA  computing  and  optical  computing. 
Quantum is most likely to come to fruition first, he said.
Quantum  computers  would  do  their  calculating  on  the  subatomic  level,  where  the  laws  of  nature  to  which  we're 
accustomed are turned upside down.
And it's possible that optics could take computing to the next dimension, using photons -- the particles that make up 
a beam of light -- the same way electrons are used in classical computing today.
Self-evolving software
Most  of  today's  programs  are  crafted,  line  by  line,  by  people.  But  Nathan  Myhrvold,  who  studied  with  renowned 
physicist  Steven  Hawking  and  now  heads  Microsoft's  research  and  development  efforts,  said  the  day  is  coming 
when software will educate and evolve itself.
"We're not getting smarter every year," he said, but computers are.

Page 3 of 4
A LOOK AT HOW WE'LL COMPUTE EXPO PROVIDES 50-YEAR GLIMPSE INTO THE FUTURE
 
We  could  scan  our  brains,  digitize  the  information  and  become  one  with  software,  he  said.  "In  50  years,  I  hope  I 
won't be talking about software. I hope I will be software."
Age of Storytelling
Television  doesn't  attract  an  audience  because  of  production  engineers,  said  Bran  Ferren  --  it  is  the  actors, 
directors  and  writers.  But  the  Web,  he  said,  remains  controlled  by  technical  people  who  don't  think  in  terms  of 
storytelling.
As the storytellers take over, this age will come to be known not as the Information Age, but the Age of Storytelling, 
said Ferren, head of creative technology for Walt Disney Imagineering.
Who will tell the stories? It could be anybody, he said, but expect to see many of the same brand names you see 
today, still telling stories.
The  Web,  for  all  its  vast  promise  --  and  Ferren  is  among  those  who  consider  the  eventual  impact  of  the  Web  up 
there with the printing press and television -- remains "ugly, stupid and unresponsive. It can't begin to teach, share 
an idea or tell a story as well as a human being," he said.
And  it  won't,  he  said,  until  the  Web  is  designed  not  just  by  computer  scientists  and  engineers,  but  by  artists  and 
storytellers.
By  storytelling,  Ferren  doesn't  mean  the  spinning  of  tales  around  a  campfire.  He  means  that  the  conveying  of 
knowledge -- whether it's teaching math or sharing the day's news -- is best done in narrative form. It's been that 
way, he said, from the stone age to Socrates to modern novels.
Notes
ACM 97: the next 50 years of computing
RELATED STORIES: page 1A, 10A
Mercury News staff writers Mike Langberg, Jodi Mardesich, Michelle Quinn, Janet Rae-Dupree, Larry Slonaker and 
Dan Stober contributed to this report.
Classification
Language: ENGLISH
Subject: BRAIN (89%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (89%); LIFE FORMS (87%); TECHNICIANS & 
TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); INSECTS & ARACHNIDS (62%); San-jose Computer Technology Event (%)
Company: MICROSOFT CORP  (70%)
Ticker: MSFT (NASDAQ)  (70%)
Industry: NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS  (70%);  SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE  (70%); 
COMPUTER EQUIPMENT (89%); MICROPROCESSORS (87%); COMPUTER CHIPS (78%); COMPUTER 
SOFTWARE (78%); COMPUTING & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (78%); SEMICONDUCTORS (78%); 
PARALLEL COMPUTING (73%)

Page 4 of 4
A LOOK AT HOW WE'LL COMPUTE EXPO PROVIDES 50-YEAR GLIMPSE INTO THE FUTURE
 
Geographic: SAN JOSE, CA, USA (89%); CALIFORNIA, USA (74%)
Load-Date: October 21, 2002
End of Document