

 
FAST COMPUTER IN A COFFEE CUP?
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
MARCH 20, 1997 Thursday SF EDITION
Copyright 1997 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved
Length: 1453 words
Byline: Janet Rae-Dupree, KNIGHT-RIDDER NEWS SERVICE
Body
We can build computers powerful enough to simulate a nuclear explosion, but even our most whiz-bang machines 
still can't calculate fast enough to predict tomorrow's weather.
Here's  the  problem:  Today's  computers  still  do  their  calculating  sequentially,  counting  on  their  digital  fingers  and 
chewing  on  one  bit  of  information  before  moving  at  light  speed  to  the  next  one.  Even  "massively  parallel" 
supercomputers,  machines  built  with  myriad  processors  to  strip  apart  a  problem  and  mull  it  over  in  chunks,  can't 
hack  through  science's  most  cosmic  problems  fast  enough  to  be  useful.  Why  bother  asking  the  fastest 
supercomputer a question if it's still going to take centuries to spit out a response?
But a quantum computer - an entirely different animal altogether, one that does its figuring in the subatomic world 
- now, that would be fast. A quantum computer could take a question and examine all possible answers, the right 
ones and the wrong ones, virtually at once. In theory anyway, the right answers would rise to the top like cream on 
milk, ready for the skimming.
If only researchers could figure out how to build one.
They're working on it. While quantum computers once were a philosophical conundrum mulled over by theoretical 
physicists  over  a  round  of  beers  after  work,  they  recently  have  come  under  increasingly  intense  professional 
attention. One proposal even theorizes that such a computer could do its calculating inside a mug of coffee.
No one laughs anymore at the idea that researchers may one day build this fanciful machine.
The barriers are huge. Ironically, the reasons for the difficulties lie in the same laws of quantum physics that would 
make such a machine possible in the first place.
The  study  of  quantum  physics  during  the  last  few  decades  has  taught  researchers  the  arcane  rules  of  the 
subatomic  road.  Quantum  theorists  trying  to  describe  these  rules  to  the  uninitiated  inevitably  use  the  word 
counterintuitive, a fancy way of saying it just doesn't make sense.
"Anyone who is not shocked by quantum theory has not understood it," said Niels Bohr, the Danish physicist who 
helped build the first nuclear bomb.
Most of the "real world" thinks you can be in only one place at one time. We also believe that particles are simply 
bits of matter.

Page 2 of 3
FAST COMPUTER IN A COFFEE CUP?
 
But in the quantum world, these are the rules: Elementary particles, such as electrons or the photon particles that 
make up a beam of light, behave like particles and like waves. Theorists believe that electrons hovering around an 
atom's nucleus follow every possible path at once; the electron can't be said to have followed any one path until it's 
actually observed. Elementary particles, in a sense, can be in every possible place at the same time. This strange 
state is called superposition, and it's an important part of how researchers hope to build a quantum computer.
In today's digital computing, each bit of information is either a 1 or a 0. It's either on or off, open or closed. It can't 
be something in between.
But  in  the  quantum  world,  a  particle  can  be  every  possible  combination  of  the  two  states.  It's  neither  1  nor  0.  It's 
both.  This  quantum  bit,  called  a  qubit,  could,  in  theory,  be  linked  up  with  other  qubits  to  create  a  quantum 
computer.
Quantum  reality  creates  a  serious  problem,  however.  Once  you  observe  the  qubit,  the  moment  you  measure  it,  it 
fundamentally changes. Observation draws the qubit out of the quantum world. It becomes either a 1 or a 0. And 
your computation is blown.
So quantum computers, if they are to be built, must function without outside interference until the precise moment 
when the answer is ready, a moment that researchers are learning how to spot.
How  then  can  researchers  be  certain  the  qubits  are  doing  their  calculating  without  making  mistakes?  In 
conventional  computing,  this  so-called  process  of  error  correction  can  be  done  by  pushing  a  bit  back  in  the  right 
direction if it gets flipped the wrong way. If you can't interact with a quantum computer, how are you supposed to 
be certain it's handing out the right answer?
"You  take  one  quantum  bit  [of  information]  and  spread  it  over  five  physical  qubits,"  explains  Peter  Shor,  a 
mathematician  at  AT&T  Labs  Research  in  New  Jersey  who  is  credited  with  having  revived  interest  in  quantum 
computers  three  years  ago  by  proving  that  such  a  machine  could  be  made  to  compute.  "You've  got  one  qubit 
encoded into five qubits. There's enough redundancy that if one is wrong, you can . . . measure how it differs."
Quantum computing skeptic Rolf Landauer, a researcher at IBM in New Jersey, three years ago asserted that no 
one would ever figure out how to do quantum error correction. He acknowledges that he was impressed when Shor 
proposed a way to do so. But Landauer warns that Shor's proposal hasn't been tried in large-scale computations, 
and  that  even  if  error  correction  one  day  is  achieved,  quantum  computing  continues  to  face  a  daunting  array  of 
other hurdles.
"My  skepticism  comes  from  [the  difficulty]  in  taking  each  piece  of  information  and  putting  it  through  a  very,  very 
large number of steps," Landauer said. "There's a great question in my mind whether these clever tricks [that Shor 
and  quantum  experimenters  have  come  up  with]  are  adequate  to  handle  a  serious  amount  of  computation.  My 
intuitive judgment is that, no, it's just too difficult a thing to do."
Undaunted,  researchers  are  pushing  ahead.  Several  experiments  have  shown  that  scientists  can  manipulate  the 
basic building blocks that could be used to construct a quantum computer. More experiments are planned.
Among the more intriguing proposals is the one that would create a quantum computer in coffee. Neil Gershenfeld 
at  the  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology  and  Isaac  Chuang  at  the  University  of  California-Santa  Barbara  last 
month released a paper in the journal Science in which they said they thought they could build a working, limited-
use 10-qubit computer in a warm liquid that contains a variety of different organic molecules.
In other words: coffee.
Very limited quantum computations (such as asking the computer to factor the number 15 - the answer is 5 times 
3)  could  be  done  inside  the  tumbling  sea  of  molecules.  The  mug  of  coffee  would  be  placed  in  a  strong  magnetic 
field and then hit with radio frequencies in a process called nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. NMR is used 
by chemists to study the nature of molecules.

Page 3 of 3
FAST COMPUTER IN A COFFEE CUP?
 
In the coffee experiment, the radio pulses would force the nuclei inside the atoms that make the molecules in the 
mug to "spin" in a specific direction. The spin of an atom tells which way each atom's internal magnet is pointed.
Each molecule then would be made up of perhaps 10 atoms converted by this outside spin control into qubits. The 
hundred-billion-trillion molecules in the cup each would be a quantum computer, but all the molecules would work 
simultaneously on the same computation.
The qubits - in this case, the nuclei buried inside the atoms - would be protected from outside interference by their 
own electrons, spinning protectively around them.
So  far,  Gershenfeld  and  Chuang  have  gotten  a  vial  of  liquid  containing  molecules  of  alanine  to  add  1  plus  1  by 
programming the radio frequency that controls the spin's direction.
Other  experimenters  have  focused  on  the  need  to  isolate  qubits  completely  from  their  environment.  Using 
breathtakingly  small  pieces  of  equipment  called  ion  traps,  they  suspend  quantum  particles  called  ions  -  charged 
atoms or electrons - in a vacuum and then zap them with laser light to turn them into qubits.
At the National Institute of Standards and Technology, a team led by David Wineland and Chris Monroe has been 
working with ions of beryllium. Inside the trap, Wineland and Monroe line up the ions like a string of charged pearls 
and then they set it to rocking to and fro.
The  motion  of  the  rocking  string  lets  the  ions  share  quantum  information  up  and  down  the  string's  length, 
undisturbed  by  the  outside  world.  Each  ion  in  the  string  can  be  selectively  programmed  through  different  types  of 
laser light, Wineland said.
"This isn't something you would want to invest your money in yet," Wineland said. "By anybody's reckoning, this is 
still a real long shot."
Even if all of the experiments lead to nothing, researchers say, the journey still will have been worthwhile.
"If  nothing  else,  it  drives  traditional  computer  scientists  to  revisit  some  of  their  thinking,  some  of  their  basic 
premises,"  said  Nabil  Amer,  department  manager  at  the  IBM  Almaden  Research  Laboratory  in  San  Jose,  Calif. 
"We're still learning about the basic science that's involved. . . . We'll do our darnedest to explore it fully so that, if it 
doesn't go anywhere, we know that it couldn't have. We don't want to miss anything."
Classification
Language: ENGLISH
Subject: QUANTUM COMPUTING (90%); QUANTUM MECHANICS (90%); PHYSICS (89%); EXPLOSIONS 
(78%); NUCLEAR PHYSICS (78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (73%); MILITARY WEAPONS (50%)
Industry: COMPUTER EQUIPMENT (90%); QUANTUM COMPUTING (90%); SUPERCOMPUTERS (76%); 
MILITARY WEAPONS (50%)
Geographic: PHILADELPHIA, PA, USA (58%)
Load-Date: October 18, 2002
End of Document