

 
Future of computing may lie in a coffee cup 
The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)
November 10, 1997 Monday
FINAL EDITION
Copyright 1997 Newark Morning Ledger Co. All Rights Reserved
Section: TECH; Pg. 39
Length: 764 words
Byline: Kevin Coughlin, Star-Ledger Staff
Dateline: CAMBRIDGE, Mass. 
Body
You won't have to worry about spilling coffee onto the computers of the future. In fact, it may be necessary.
 Professor  Neil  Gershenfeld  of  the  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology's  Media  Laboratory  is  happy  to 
demonstrate, pouring a cup of muddy java into a thin, coil-wrapped cylinder.
 He's illustrating his concept of quantum computing. It's a bold idea, intended to take computing deep into the next 
millennium, after conventional methods for shrinking transistors reach their physical limits.
 He  has  competition.  Some  of  the  country's  brightest  minds  are  looking  20  years  down  the  road  for  new  ways  of 
computing. They contemplate chemical fabrication processes called nanotechnology, optical systems that transmit 
data with light pulses instead of electrical signals, and even organic methods for growing some sort of processor.
It's a worthy challenge for the Media Lab, a corporate-sponsored idea factory.
Gershenfeld says quantum computing can turn ordinary molecules into processors. He thinks developing this new 
breed of computers will be cheaper than trying to extend the limits of transistor manufacturing. He says the cost of 
building new and improved chip plants could exceed the gross national product of Planet Earth in just two decades.
 Quantum  computers  would  pack  a  number-crunching  wallop  unlike  anything  known  today.  In  a  single  day,  one 
quantum machine could solve problems that would tie up today's fastest computer for the lifetime of the universe - a 
pretty long time.
 This quantum leap will bound into something called "Hilbert space," the "quantum part of the universe we don't use. 
It's the only untapped resource," says Gershenfeld.
For those who spent physics class in Hilbert space, here are the Cliff Notes:
 Computers  process  information  in  strings  of  1s  and  0s  stored  in  transistors.  Quantum  computers  could  store 
"qubits"  in  protons,  where  their  "up"  or  "down"  spin  would  correspond  to  1s  and  0s.  Now  for  the  weird  part. 
According  to  quantum  theory,  protons  lead  a  dual  existence.  They  can  be  up  and  down  at  the  same  time.  This 
translates to an exponential rise in the number of calculations they can perform simultaneously.
 Any questions?
 Liquids offer the most stable environment for this kind of programming, says Gershenfeld. Caffeine molecules just 
might work.

Page 2 of 3
Future of computing may lie in a coffee cup 
 
 "All  along,  molecules  have  known  how  to  compute.  Ordinary  molecules.  Caffeine  in  coffee  knew  how.  We  just 
didn't know how to ask the right questions," says Gershenfeld, who has made a rudimentary quantum computer 
he  compares  to  the  Altair,  forerunner  of  the  PC.  Though  it  may  take  decades  to  perfect,  he  is  confident  that, 
eventually, a computer "will be a container, where you pour in processor fluid."
 Meantime,  at  the  legendary  Xerox  PARC,  the  Palo  Alto  (Calif.)  Research  Center,  Ralph  Merkle  is  betting  on 
nanotechnology, a chemical process for creating complex structures molecule by molecule.
 "Think of rearranging atoms and molecules the way you might arrange and rearrange Lego blocks," Merkle says. 
"Whatever the technology and whatever we wish to build, we must build it with a great deal of precision."
 Today's  photochemical  methods,  which  can  print  millions  of  transistors  on  a  stamp-  sized  chip,  are  not  precise 
enough to keep the Incredible Shrinking Transistor shrinking indefinitely. In today's process, atoms are sprayed "all 
over the place" (a process called doping) to produce the desired electrical qualities in a semiconductor chip.
 "It's like firing screws, wrenches and tools at a car to build a car. It's not the best way to build a car," says Merkle.
 But don't hold the phone for news on nanotechnology. Even synthesizing simple molecules is a painstaking task for 
modern chemists. Merkle says it may be decades before they can build structures with millions or billions of atoms. 
Moreover,  research  is  scattered;  he  thinks  it  will  take  something  akin  to  the  Apollo  project  to  move  any  of  these 
concepts from science fiction to reality.
 Nor is Merkle is optimistic about replacing electrical pulses with light waves, another grand strategy of the future. 
Although  light  works  well  for  long-distance  communications  (the  phone  companies  uses  lots  of  lasers  today),  he 
says light wavelengths are too wide for advanced computing. "We want to build devices much smaller than that," he 
says.
 William Brinkman of Bell Labs says all this talk of a sci-fi future is, well, premature.
 "Silicon  won't  run  out  for  another  15  years,  and  it  will  be  pretty  awesome  at  that  stage,"  he  says.  "Nobody  talks 
about replacing the light bulb. It's pretty much what it's always been."
Graphic
 
1. Professor Neil Gershenfeld of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Media Laboratory demonstrates one 
idea for quantum computers, sort of a Mr. Fusion for the next millennium.
Classification
Language: ENGLISH
Publication-Type: Newspaper
Journal Code: nsl
Subject: NANOELECTRONICS (90%); QUANTUM COMPUTING (90%); QUANTUM MECHANICS (89%); 
SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (89%); PHYSICS (77%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (74%); 
NANOTECHNOLOGY (74%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (72%); GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT (70%)

Page 3 of 3
Future of computing may lie in a coffee cup 
 
Organization: MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY (91%)
Industry: COMPUTER EQUIPMENT (90%); NANOELECTRONICS (90%); QUANTUM COMPUTING (90%); 
MANUFACTURING (79%); DATA TRANSMISSION (77%); SEMICONDUCTOR MFG (75%); MANUFACTURING 
FACILITIES (74%)
Geographic: NEWARK, NJ, USA (88%); EARTH (79%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (74%); NEW JERSEY, USA 
(73%); CALIFORNIA, USA (66%)
Load-Date: April 18, 2007
End of Document